Anandamide (N-arachidonoylethanolamine) and six fatty acid ethanolamides were synthesized and their pharmacological effects in mice were assessed using catalepsy, hypothermia and pentobarbital-induced sleep prolongation as indices. The effects of phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) pretreatment on anandamide effects were also evaluated and discussed in relation to inhibition of anandamide amidohydrolase in mouse brain and liver. The cataleptogenic effect of anandamide  (ED50=6.0 mg/kg, i.v.) was 4 to 6 times more active than those of N-oleoyl- (ED50=26.5 mg/kg, i.v.) and N-linoleoylethanolamine (ED50=37.5 mg/kg, i.v.), although the peak time in the effect was observed within 1 min after i.v. administration. None of the saturated fatty acid ethanolamides (N-myristoyl-, N-palmitoyl-, N-stearoyl- and N-arachidoylethanolamine) showed a positive response in the cataleptogenic effect even at a dose up to 40 mg/kg i.v. Anandamide, N-linoleoyl-, N-oleoyl- and N-myristoylethanolamine (10 mg/kg, i.v.)  produced a significant hypothermia (0.19 to 0.59 degrees C) at 5 to 15 min after  administration. The duration of the effects of these ethanolamides was also relatively short. Anandamide, N-linoleoyl-, N-oleoyl- and N-palmitoylethanolamine (5 or 10 mg/kg, i.v.) significantly prolonged pentobarbital-induced sleeping time by 148-207% of control sleeping time. The cataleptogenic effect of anandamide was markedly potentiated by pretreatment of mice with PMSF (100 mg/kg, i.p.). The ED50 (mg/kg, i.v.) of anandamide was 0.48 (0.24-0.96) in PMSF-pretreated mice. The pretreatment of mice with PMSF significantly decreased the metabolic clearance rate of anandamide in microsomal fractions of liver and brain. Thus, the Vmax/Km values of brain and hepatic microsomes were 26 and 10%, respectively, as compared with those of control mice. The present study demonstrated that anandamide and N-acylethanolamines of unsaturated fatty acids exhibited cannabinoid-like effects in mice, and that anandamide amidohydrolase has an important role in the pharmacological effects of anandamide in vivo. 
