 The dogma of exclusive T cell recognition of peptide-major histocompatibility complex (pMHC) antigens has recently been challenged (Kaufmann 1996; Melian et al. 1996; Porcelli et al. 1996; Carbone and Gleeson 1997; Kihlberg and Elofsson 1997 ). Cells presenting nonpeptidic or modified peptide antigens (e.g., glycopeptides and glycolipids bound to class I and II MHC, and MHC class I–like CD1 molecules, respectively) can also be recognized by cytotoxic T cells (CTL) bearing α/β or γ/δ T cell receptors (TCR) (Beckman et al. 1994; Davis and Chien 1995; Sieling et al. 1995; Chien et al. 1996; Kaufmann 1996 ; reviewed by Porcelli et al. 1998 ). However, the structural properties of these unconventional TCR ligands are currently undetermined except for the crystal structure of mouse CD1 (Zeng et al. 1997 ). Conventional T cell recognition of pMHC has been widely studied (Eisen et al. 1996; Davis et al. 1998 ) and now includes the recent high-resolution crystal structures of intact α/β TCR-pMHC complexes (Garboczi et al. 1996; Garcia et al. 1996, Garcia et al. 1998; Ding et al. 1998 ). The TCR binds the pMHC surface in a diagonal orientation in which a majority of the intermolecular interactions are derived from contact of CDRs 1 and 2 of both TCR polypeptide chains with highly conserved MHC α1  and α2  helical residues. The TCR α and β chain hypervariable CDR3 loops are ideally positioned within the MHC helices to examine the contents of the peptide binding groove and hence are well suited for their role in peptide-antigen recognition. The consistent diagonal orientation of the TCRs over the pMHC so far observed allows more accurate prediction of the structural determinants of MHC-bound ligands that are likely to be responsible for T cell recognition (reviewed by Wilson and Garcia 1997 ). The biological role of antigen ligation by γ/δ TCR in T cell–mediated immunity is far less understood. Indeed, MHC-independent recognition of ligands by γ/δ TCRs was anticipated after analysis of their primary structures. Similar to the comparison between immunoglobin (Ig) VH  and VL  CDR3 loops, the TCR δ chain CDR3s are significantly longer and more heterogenous in length than those of the γ chain (Rock et al. 1994 ). The TCR α and β chain CDR3s are both long and homogeneous in length. Therefore, the γ and δ chain pairings suggest γ/δ TCR antigen binding is more closely related to that of Ig molecules than to α/β TCR (Rock et al. 1994; Davis and Chien 1995 ). Many γ/δ T cell effector functions overlap with those of α/β T cells; however, γ/δ T cells differ in their antigens and mode of ligand recognition that may be reflected in their localization, relative population, and activation kinetics (Kaufmann 1996; Boismenu and Havran 1997 ). Glycosylation is a common posttranslational modification of proteins to be secreted or transported to the cell surface (Varki 1993 ). Nevertheless, evidence for the processing of glycoproteins to glycopeptides and subsequent glycopeptide presentation by MHC class I (MHC I) or II (MHC II) receptors during normal immune responses is scarce (Carbone and Gleeson 1997; Kihlberg and Elofsson 1997 ). Glycosylated fragments of collagen type II presented by MHC II I-Aq  (Broddefalk et al. 1998 ) and the O-linked glycosylation of cytosolic and nuclear proteins with a single N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) (Hart et al. 1989; Haurum et al. 1994 ) represent two possible sources of natural glycopeptides for T cell recognition. Studies using synthetic glycopeptides have enhanced our understanding of oligosaccharide recognition by T cells (Carbone and Gleeson 1997; Kihlberg and Elofsson 1997 ). The ability of T cells to recognize carbohydrates has important implications, as some glycoprotein and glycolipid-associated oligosaccharides have been identified as tumor-associated antigens (TAA; Hakomori 1989 ). In the first demonstration of a T cell response to a naturally occuring glycan, immunization with synthetic MHC I restricted peptides conjugated with GlcNAc generated glycopeptide-specific CTL (Haurum et al. 1994 ). Although many studies have demonstrated the fine specificity of helper T cells and CTL for glycopeptide versus carrier peptide, they have not convincingly demonstrated TCR recognition of the carbohydrate hapten moiety independent of the restricting MHC background or carrier peptide. We have found that immunization with MHC I H-2Kb  restricted glycopeptide RGY8-6H-Gal2  (Figure 1 ) can generate polyclonal CTL that specifically kill cells presenting the glycopeptide-MHC complex (gpMHC) as well as a glycolipid with the galabiose oligosaccharide as the hydrophilic head group (Abdel-Motal et al. 1996 ). Fractionation of the CTL population by TCR expression has shown glycopeptide-specific killing is mediated by α/β T cells (60% of the CTL), and glycolipid-specific killing by γ/δ T cells (10%–15% of the CTL). The MHC-restricted α/β T cell response to the glycopeptide, and gpMHC-unrestricted, hapten-specific response of γ/δ T cells correlate well with the antigen recognition abilities of each T cell subset.  Although their biological properties have been elucidated, the structures of MHC-presented glycopeptides have not. Structural analysis is essential since a majority of the synthetic glycopeptides that have been tested have failed to generate carbohydrate-specific T cell responses (Kihlberg and Elofsson 1997 ). Glycopeptides with centrally located oligosaccharides, such as RGY8-6H-Gal2 , have clearly been the most immunogenic (Abdel-Motal et al. 1996 ). Therefore, we determined the crystal structure of the H-2Kb /RGY8-6H-Gal2  complex at 2.2 Å resolution to identify the structural determinants critical for T cell activation. The RGY8-6H-Gal2  glycopeptide structure shows that glycan position, linker length, and carbohydrate size are important for recognition and discrimination by the different T cells and can be rationalized with the recently determined footprint of the α/β T cell receptor over the pMHC (Garboczi et al. 1996; Garcia et al. 1996, Garcia et al. 1998; Ding et al. 1998 ).  Results Chemical Characteristics of the Glycopeptides and Glycolipids The known MHC allele-specific motifs (Rammensee et al. 1995 ) and available crystal structures of Kb  (Fremont et al. 1992 ) and Db  (Young et al. 1994 ) were utilized in glycopeptide synthesis and design (Figure 1 ). The Db -binding peptides were ASNENMETM from PR8 influenza virus nucleoprotein (NP) (van Bleek and Nathenson 1990 ) and SGPSNTPPEI from adenovirus Ad5EI protein (Rammensee et al. 1993 ). The Kb -binding peptides were FAPGNYPAL from Sendai virus NP (Schumacher et al. 1991 ) and RGYVYQGL from vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) NP (van Bleek and Nathenson 1990 ). The allele-specific anchor residues for Kb  and Db  are centrally located at P5 for Db  and P5 (8-mer) or P6 (9-mer) for Kb  (Figure 1 ). Five carbohydrates differing in size and chemical structure were coupled either to serine, cysteine, or homocysteine (Figure 1 ). Oligosaccharide CD77 is the Burkitt lymphoma TAA (Nudelman et al. 1983 ). Lactose and GM3-lactam are also tumor-associated saccharides (Holmes et al. 1987; Nores et al. 1987 ). Galabiose (Gal-α(1,4)-Galβ or Gal2 ) is an integral part of several natural glycolipid head groups and is the terminal disaccharide of CD77 (Figure 1 ). The amino acid glycans replaced upward-pointed residues flanking the central anchor in the Kb  or Db  peptides or were added to their termini (Figure 1 ; Abdel-Motal et al. 1995, Abdel-Motal et al. 1996 ). Peptide binding to MHC I was unaffected by the glycan modifications (Abdel-Motal et al. 1996 ), and the stability of the glycopeptides in vivo has been previously demonstrated (Abdel-Motal et al. 1993 ). Monoclonal antibody (MAb) detection of the peptide-linked carbohydrates on the cell surface differed depending on the position of the glycan substitution on the peptide and linker length. Thus, antibody binding to the peptide glycans provided a measure of the carbohydrate exposure in the various pMHC complexes. Carbohydrates attached at internal positions in the peptide by the serine linker were poorly detected by anti-carbohydrate MAb. In contrast, high carbohydrate exposure was detected for all of the glycopeptides that had N-terminal cysteine-ethylene extensions or with the homocysteine linker at internal positions with one exception (ASN9-6H-CD77Table 1 ). The anti-CD77 MAb is of the IgM type and may not be optimal for binding to CD77 in the context of the pMHC. Carbohydrate headgroups in all of the glycolipids, after liposomal transfer to EL-4 target cells, were highly exposed at the cell surface and stable for at least 24 hr under tissue culture conditions, as detected with the corresponding anti-carbohydrate MAb (Abdel-Motal et al. 1996 ).   Specificity of α/β and γ/δ CTL toward Glycopeptides and Glycolipids Immunizations with the glycopeptide panel produced a wide range of T cell responses (Table 1 ; Abdel-Motal et al. 1996 ). Glycosylation of the peptide termini, glycopeptides with internal serine-coupled oligosaccharides, and Db -binding glycopeptides produced low CTL responses in general with no evidence for any carbohydrate specificity. In contrast, Kb -binding glycopeptides, RGY8-4H-Gal2  and RGY8-6H-Gal2 , with central homocysteine-coupled galabiose generated strong bulk CTL responses that specifically killed glycopeptide-coated target cells (Table 1 ; Figure 1 ). Fractionation of the RGY8-6H-Gal2  generated T cell population based on α/β or γ/δ TCR expression determined glycopeptide-specific killing was primarily by the α/β T cells (Table 1 ). Interestingly, the bulk CTL generated with RGY8-6H-Gal2  also killed target cells coated with Db -binding glycopeptides containing homocysteine-coupled galabiose (e.g., ASN9-6H-Gal2 ), and suggested a strict carbohydrate specificity independent of the pMHC background (Abdel-Motal et al. 1996 ). MHC-unrestricted carbohydrate specificity was unambiguously determined by fusing liposomes composed of galabiose containing glycolipid (Figure 1C ) with EL-4, YAC-I, and P815 cells. These glycolipid-coated target cells were specifically killed by a small γ/δ T cell subpopulation present in the bulk CTL generated against RGY8-6H-Gal2  (Table 1 ). These data suggest that the α/β and γ/δ T cells recognized different portions of the same gpMHC antigen that correlates with their specific killing of glycopeptide-coated or glycolipid-coated target cells, respectively. Thus, we determined the H-2Kb /RGY8-6H-Gal2  crystal structure to improve our understanding of carbohydrate recognition by T cells.  RGY8-6H-Gal2  Glycopeptide Structure The crystal structure of Kb /RGY8-6H-Gal2  was determined using well-developed procedures for Kb  pMHC complexes (see Experimental Procedures). The final model included the H-2Kb /glycopeptide complex, four well-ordered N-linked carbohydrates to the MHC, and 108 waters (Rcryst  22.4%, Rfree  27.9%). Electron density for RGY8-6H-Gal2  was continuous and well resolved, allowing unambiguous modeling of the glycosylated peptide (Figure 2 ). The glycopeptide structure is nearly identical to that of Kb -bound VSV-8 for the common residues (P1-P5, P7-P8) (Fremont et al. 1992 ). The root-mean-square deviation (r.m.s.d) is only 0.19 Å for the equivalent polyalanine atoms between VSV-8 and RGY8-6H-Gal2  after the Cα atoms of the Kb  α1 α2  superdomains are aligned. Many interactions between the glycopeptide and MHC heavy chain, including water-mediated hydrogen bonds, are also shared with the Kb /VSV-8 complex (Table 2 ); however, the glycosidic modification makes RGY8-6H-Gal2  the largest MHC I bound antigen to have its structure determined to date. The homocysteine galabiose glycan at position 6 of the peptide (HggP6) extends 12 Å above the peptide backbone (Figure 3A  and Figure 3B ). Arginine, the longest unmodified amino acid, can only extend approximately 7 Å out from the peptide backbone (e.g., see ArgP1 in Figure 2  and Figure 3 ). Interestingly, there are no significant alterations of the Kb  structure as a result of glycopeptide binding.    The conformation of the galabiose thioether linker loosely matches that of VSV-8 GlnP6 for the first few equivalent atom positions and orients HggP6 toward the α2  helix (Figure 3B ). HggP6 “leans” on the α2  helix, creating several contacts unique to the glycopeptide (Table 2 ), but does not make any hydrogen bonds. In the absence of T cell receptor ligation or any direct hydrogen bonds to the linker or sugars from the Kb  α1 α2  domains, the polar and hydrophobic contacts are the only interactions stabilizing the placement of the glycosidic modification adjacent to the α2  helix. The contacts between the disaccharide and Kb  are mainly with the internal galactose residue. Only a single contact exists between the Kb  α2  domain and the terminal galactose (Table 2 ); in fact, both sugars of the galabiose are clasped between the MHC α2  helix and the β2 m subunit of a neighboring Kb  molecule in the crystal lattice. The neighboring β2 m is on the opposite side of galabiose from the α2  helix. Two hydrogen bonds and several polar interactions between HggP6 and neighboring β2 m residues Leuβ40, Glyβ43, Argβ81, and Lysβ83 are a result of the galabiose entrapment (Table 2 ). These interactions may be preventing the formation of other hydrogen bonds between galabiose and Kb . The peptide-conjugated galabiose retains a structure very similar to that of the free disaccharide (Svensson et al. 1986 ). Superposition of the small molecule galabiose crystal structure with the HggP6-linked disaccharide structure gives an r.m.s.d of only 0.78 Å. The two galabiose structures differ mainly due to a 46° difference between their internal glycosidic dihedral angles, presumably due to contact of the HggP6 galabiose with the neighboring β2 m molecule; the terminal galactose in HggP6 must rotate away from the neighboring β2 m molecule to avoid forming energetically unfavorable close contacts.  Disaccharide Exposure and Mobility The galabiose disaccharide is 71% exposed to solvent in the crystal structure. The orientation adopted by HggP6 places most of its mass into the open space between the α1 α2  helices. Thus, the overall exposed surface area of the glycopeptide is substantially greater than that of normal peptides bound by Kb  and other MHC I antigens (see Figure 3D  and Figure 3E ). Contact between glycopeptide residue HggP6 and the α2  helix also contributes to significantly more Kb -buried surface in the glycopeptide complex (952 Å2 ) than in Kb /VSV-8 (843 Å2 ). Modeling studies of this complex show that the galabiose exposure could be even greater. Torsion angles for the relatively long thioether-hydrocarbon linker are largely unrestricted. Small rotations (<20°) of just two of the linker torsion angles can free the galabiose from any contact with the Kb  α2  helix (Figure 3C ). The repositioned galabiose would be 100% solvent accessible giving the glycopeptide nearly double the exposed peptide surface area of other MHC-bound peptides (383 Å2  versus 150–220 Å2 ). Galabiose-specific monoclonal antibodies strongly recognize RGY8-6H-Gal2  treated RMA-S cells (Abdel-Motal et al. 1996 ), providing further evidence for the high exposure of the glycopeptide-attached galabiose. The MAb could possibly recognize the galabiose in close proximity to the MHC helices, but small haptens are more commonly buried deep within the immunoglobin combining site (reviewed by Wilson and Stanfield 1994 ). The unrestricted access to the galabiose is compatible with antibody binding of small haptens and therefore supports the likelihood of HggP6 conformations that fully expose the carbohydrates (e.g.Figure 3C ).  Carbohydrate Dominance of the TCR Footprint An extended glycan linker, such as that observed in the RGY8-6H-Gal2  crystal structure, will place the galabiose well above the peptide backbone in the pMHC region normally covered by the α/β TCR CDR3 loops (Garboczi et al. 1996; Garcia et al. 1996, Garcia et al. 1998; Ding et al. 1998 ). Torsion angle rotations of the linker can result in large lateral movements of the galabiose; however, the central peptide attachment site, combined with the diagonal orientation of the TCR over the MHC binding groove, still keeps the galabiose within the CDR3 region of the TCR footprint. Therefore, direct interactions between the RGY8-6H-Gal2  carbohydrates and the TCR CDR3 loops are relatively convincing. The current position of the disaccharide in the Kb /RGY8-6H-Gal2  crystal structure would place it under the CDR3β loop and next to a key β chain contact patch on the MHC α2  helix (residues 149–158). TCR recognition of the galabiose, therefore, would predominantly involve the β subunit. The area between the glycopeptide and the α1  helix is more accessible and could allow TCR α and β subunit contacts directly to the peptide backbone as well as to the side chains. TCR corecognition of glycopeptide and MHC residues in this manner favors an MHC-restricted, glycopeptide-specific α/β T cell response, and may explain the low-level bulk CTL cross-reactivity to the carrier peptide stripped of carbohydrate. The highly exposed galabiose also closely matches the attributes of preferred γ/δ T cell antigens that supports the dichotomy of the anti-RGY8-6H-Gal2  T cell response. Direct, immunoglobin-like recognition of the galabiose, either as a highly exposed glycopeptide hapten or glycolipid headgroup, is easily conceivable. Complete carbohydrate exposure can be achieved by varying the HggP6 conformation (e.g.Figure 3C ) or may be induced through TCR binding. A great variety of TCR docking scenarios and HggP6 conformations appear feasible, and could potentially coexist in vivo, which would explain the simultaneous generation of carbohydrate-specific γ/δ CTL and glycopeptide-specific α/β CTL by RGY8-6H-Gal2 .   Discussion Important Structural Features of the Kb /Glycopeptide Complex The crystal structure of H-2Kb -bound RGY8-6H-Gal2  reveals the VSV-8 carrier peptide and Kb  structures are unaffected by the peptide glycosylation; thus, the novel features of the glycopeptide presentation are specifically localized to the carbohydrate portion of the ligand. Indeed, the glycan modification places the galabiose disaccharide at the outer limits of the MHC peptide binding groove where it abuts the apex of the α2  helix, well beyond the reach of normal peptide side chains. The galabiose is secured at this position more by intermolecular crystal contacts to a neighboring β2 m molecule than by intramolecular contacts to the MHC receptor, suggesting that HggP6 may have significantly more conformational freedom in solution. The chemical structure, P6 substitution site, and size of the Hgg linker favor a highly exposed hapten moiety in virtually any linker conformation. This unusual access to an MHC I bound ligand allows for direct TCR interactions with the galabiose, which is considerably larger than an amino acid side chain. Alterations in the shape of the TCR combining site, such as large conformational adjustments of the CDR3 loops, may be required for a TCR to bind the Kb /RGY8-6H-Gal2  disaccharide compared to a pMHC. Movements of up to several angstroms by CDRs 1α, 3α, and 3β were observed in comparisons between the free and bound structures of the murine 2C TCR (Garcia et al. 1998 ). It is likely that CDR flexibility is also involved, although to a lesser extent, in the high-affinity allorecognition of the H-2Ld /QL9 peptide complex by the 2C TCR. A model of the 2C/Ld  interaction (Speir et al. 1998 ) reveals that a bulge near the QL9 C terminus, as a result of a ridge in the Ld  binding groove floor, is likely to greatly increase the TCR contact with the QL9 peptide and require different conformations of the 2C CDRs for optimal binding compared to the syngeneic 2C/dEV8/Kb  complex. Alternatively, HggP6 may adopt a conformation that places the carbohydrate into a cavity between the TCR α and β chains (Garcia et al. 1996 ) or generally between the TCR and pMHC, requiring little to no structural adjustments of either receptor. Indeed, the TCR-pMHC interfaces are extensive but exhibit poor shape complementarity, leaving large cavities between the contacting surfaces (Garboczi et al. 1996; Ding et al. 1998; Garcia et al. 1998 ). Regardless of the poorly formed TCR-pMHC interface, central modifications of the peptide antigen that extend outward from the MHC binding groove will create new and more numerous contacts with the TCR.  Glycopeptide Structure-Function Relationships: A Beginning MHC I and II bound peptide immunogens with glycosylation sites outside of the central peptide residues normally fail to generate glycopeptide-specific CTL (Abdel-Motal et al. 1996; Kihlberg and Elofsson 1997 ). It is now apparent that glycans at these positions would not promote contact between carbohydate haptens and the hypervariable CDR3 loops of an α/β TCR, leading to the killing of both carrier peptide and glycopeptide coated target cells by the CTL generated against glycopeptides with noncentral glycan modifications (Ishioka et al. 1992; Abdel-Motal et al. 1996; Kihlberg and Elofsson 1997 ). Glycosylation of the central peptide residues places the carbohydrates within the expected TCR CDR3α and 3β footprint and yields glycopeptides whose immunogenicity is dependent upon the linker length and carbohydrate size. Glycopeptides incorporating disaccharides or larger carbohydrates linked to serine showed weak CTL immunogenicity, as well as poor detection by carbohydrate-specific MAb on the cell surface (Abdel-Motal et al. 1996 ). In contrast, GlcNAc monosaccharides coupled to peptides with serine linkers generate CTL that are able to discriminate between the glycosylated and native peptides, as well as between chemically similar glycopeptides (Haurum et al. 1994 ). The fine specificity demonstrated in T cell recognition of the GlcNAc-based glycopeptides suggests monosaccharides attached to short linkers near the peptide center are better suited for glycopeptide-specific α/β TCR recognition. From the Kb /RGY8-6H-Gal2  structure, it appears the greater mass of the serine-linked disaccharides and larger carbohydrates will be confined to the limited space between the MHC helices and thus may interfere with TCR-MHC interactions and/or hinder specific-recognition of the carbohydrates by the TCR. The smaller size of monosaccharides is less likely to disrupt α/β TCR interactions within the MHC binding site, but their relatively low exposure disfavors a carbohydrate-specific γ/δ T cell response (Figure 4 ).  Longer oligosaccharide tethers, such as homocysteine, can fully expose bound carbohydrates (Figure 3  and Figure 4 ). The greater exposure results in facilitated MAb detection of the sugars and strong generation of carbohydrate-specific CTL (Abdel-Motal et al. 1996 ), presumably through direct interaction between TCRs and the carbohydrates. Furthermore, the unobstructed access to the glycan is probably a key factor in generating an MHC-unrestricted γ/δ T cell response. Several cross-reactive T cell clones to MHC bound peptides with chemically TNP-modified lysine residues have been described (Martin et al. 1992 ). TNP exposure, when attached to lysine, would be equivalent to that of homocysteine-linked galabiose, and could be responsible for the immunodominance of the TNP epitopes and restriction of the responding T cell repertoire (Hochgeschwender et al. 1987 ). Furthermore, the specificity of the cross-reactive T cells only for TNP-lysine located near the center of the peptide, and the freedom of one TNP-specific T cell hybridoma from class II polymophism, mirrors the behavior of carbohydrate-specific CTL (Martin et al. 1992; Kohler et al. 1997 ). Thus, central placement and extensive exposure are common factors in MHC antigens that produce enhanced cross-reactivity, reduced MHC restriction, and hapten-specfic recognition by the responding T cell population.  Poor or Diminished CTL Reactivity to Large Oligosaccharides and Db -Bound Galabiose Db -bound glycopeptides with homocysteine linked galabiose (e.g.Figure 3F ) are poorly immunogenic, and Kb -bound glycopeptides presenting homocysteine-linked CD77 or GM3-lactam are less immunogenic than RGY8-6H-Gal2  (Table 1 ; Abdel-Motal et al. 1996 ). Interestingly, these glycopeptide designs could place carbohydrate structures further above the MHC α1 α2  helices than observed in Kb /RGY8-6H-Gal2  (Figure 4 ), as CD77 and GM3-lactam are larger than galabiose by one sugar unit or more. In addition, the Db -binding glycopeptides have a large arch in the peptide backbone near the C terminus that would futher elevate glycans attached to the bulged residues (Figure 3F  and Figure 4 ; Young et al. 1994 ). Peptide antigen recognition by α/β TCR normally occurs within the α1 α2  helices and may, therefore, fail to entirely encompass these large glycans. Furthermore, carbohydrates outside or atop the α1 α2  helices are likely to disrupt conserved TCR-MHC interactions that are important to the docking, orientation, and proper register of the TCR on the pMHC molecule and hence can explain the reduced, poor, or lack of CTL reactivity to these glycopeptides (Table 1 ).  γ/δ T Cell Response to Glycolipid The Kb /RGY8-6H-Gal2  crystal structure supports the possibility of distinct γ/δ CTL stimulation through MHC-unrestricted γ/δ TCR recognition of the exposed carbohydrate haptens. Indeed, the γ/δ T cells may be directly triggered by corresponding galabiose-presenting glycolipids fused with target cells (Abdel-Motal et al. 1996 ). However, it is unknown whether MHC-unrestricted antigen binding by γ/δ TCR allows triggering and clonal expansion of γ/δ CTL in the present system. Less exposed oligosaccharides may also be capable of generating γ/δ CTL, but peptide and MHC residues are more likely to be in close proximity to these carbohydrates and may inhibit γ/δ TCR binding. Interestingly, the inherent linker flexibility of HggP6 in RGY8-6H-Gal2  may provide the glycan with the ability to switch between the positions and/or structures best recognized by the two types of TCR, providing a rationale for the concurrent generation of glycopeptide-specific α/β CTL and carbohydrate-specific γ/δ CTL.  Implications for T Cell Recognition of Natural Glycopeptides Glycosylation of secreted, cell surface, nuclear, and cytoplasmic proteins (Hart et al. 1989 ) is a common posttranslational modification that plays a crucial role in molecular structure and stability, masking of microorganism target epitopes, and modulation of specific protein functions (Varki 1993 ). The small number of natural MHC I bound glycopeptides that have been identified may reflect their limited numbers at the cell surface or the technical difficulties in their detection (Haurum et al. 1994 ), but not necessarily their importance in the cellular immune response since T cell avidity for pMHC antigens widely varies. Our results, together with those from other studies of glycopeptide immunogenicity, suggest small carbohydrates (mono or disaccharides) attached to short, centrally placed linkers satisfy α/β TCR antigen binding preferences, and that carbohydrates of the same size attached to slightly longer linkers may also satisfy the requirements for γ/δ TCR antigen binding (Figure 4 ), leading to glycopeptide and carbohydrate-specific T cell responses. Asparagine-linked glycans have a pentasaccharide core decorated by further carbohydrate additions (Kornfeld and Kornfeld 1985 ); therefore, the corresponding glycopeptides would not be well suited for carbohydrate-specific CTL. In contrast, many mucins and other O-linked glycoconjugates found in the cytoplasm and nucleus are composed of mono- or disaccharides attached to serine, threonine, hydroxylysine or tyrosine (Hart et al. 1989; Kihlberg and Elofsson 1997 ) and, therefore, are more promising natural glycan antigens for T cells. The mucins, that include the Tn and sialyl Tn epitopes that are present on cancer cells and HIV envelope glycoprotein gp120 (Hansen et al. 1990 ), can be recognized by T cells (Galli-Stampino et al. 1997 ). Carbohydrate structures that are not well represented or are poorly immunogenic in normal antigen presentation could also be used in synthetic peptide immunogens to activate defined, carbohydrate-specific T cell populations. The ability to generate or enhance the Ig-like, MHC-unrestricted γ/δ T cell responses to the glycopeptide could further augment T cell surveillance and CTL effector functions against cells presenting the corresponding carbohydrate hapten. Indeed, peptide-based vaccines able to generate carbohydrate-specific CTL have potential clinical applications for treatment of various types of cancer and parasitic infections (Lanzavecchia 1993; Chesnut et al. 1995 ) by targeting abnormal glycosylation produced by malignant cells or oligosaccharide structures unique to microorganisms (Kaufmann 1996 ).   Experimental Procedures Carbohydrates, Glycopeptides, and Glycolipids Galabiose (Gal-α(1,4)Gal-β or Gal2 ), CD77 (Gal-α(1,4)Gal-β(1,4)Glc-β), lactose (Gal-β(1,4)-Glc-β), GM3 (NeuAc-α(3)-GalN-β(1,4)Glc-β), and GM3-lactam were synthesized as described (Figure 1 ; Abdel-Motal et al. 1995; Kihlberg and Elofsson 1997 ). Monoclonal antibodies specific for the carbohydrates were used to test the expression of carbohydrates on the surface of glycopeptide-treated RMA-S cells (Abdel-Motal et al. 1996 ). Glycopeptides and glycolipids were synthesized and tested for Kb  and Db -binding capacity, carbohydrate presentation, and stability in vivo as described (Abdel-Motal et al. 1995, Abdel-Motal et al. 1996 ).  CTL Generation, Assay, and Fractionation CTL were generated by immunization of C57BL/6 mice with 100 μg glycopeptide in Freund’s incomplete adjuvant at the base of the tail followed by in vitro restimulation of harvested spleen cells, as described (Zhou et al. 1992 ). CTL were tested in a short-term 4 hr 51 Cr-release assay against peptide-, glycopeptide- or glycolipid-treated target cells. Glycolipid-expressing target cells were produced by treatment of target cells with liposomes containing the different glycolipids as described (Abdel-Motal et al. 1995 ). CTL populations were fractionated using either anti-α/β or γ/δ framework MAb on magnetic Dynabeads (Dynal A. S., Norway).  Preparation and Crystallization of the Kb -Glycopeptide Complex Purified H-2Kb  was incubated with a 5-fold molar excess of RGY8-6H-Gal2  for 5 hr at room temperature (see Stura et al. 1992 ). Centricon 10 ultrafiltration was used to concentrate the MHC complex and clear any free peptide simultaneously. An exchange of bound peptides was apparent from notable band shifts between treated and untreated samples subjected to IEF electrophoresis (data not shown; see also Stura et al. 1992 ). Large single crystals were grown from 18 mg/ml H-2Kb  in 2.3 M Na/K PO4 , 2% 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol (pH 6.4), with diffraction to approximately 2.0 Å resolution.  Data Collection and Processing Diffraction data were collected in house from a flash-cooled (130 K, 25% glycerol) single crystal (0.5 × 0.5 × 0.3 mm) with a 30 cm MAR image plate mounted on a Siemens M18X CuKα x-ray generator (300 μm focal cup, 50 kV, 80 mA) fitted with Supper long double-mirror focusing optics. The data were indexed and integrated with the program DENZO (Otwinowski and Minor 1997 ). The crystals are orthorhombic, P21 21 2, with unit cell dimensions a = 135.9 Å, b = 86.8 Å, and c = 45.0 Å. The Vm  (Matthews 1968 ) of 2.86 Å3  Da−1  indicated one molecule per asymmetric unit with a solvent content of 57%. The data were merged, scaled, and reduced to a unique reflection set using the program SCALEPACK (Table 3 ; Otwinowski and Minor 1997 ).   Model Refinement A random set of 10% of the reflections between 18–2.1 Å were excluded from refinement to monitor Rfree  (Brünger 1997 ). Only procedures that minimized both Rcryst  and Rfree  were utilized. Kb /VSV-8 coordinates (Fremont et al. 1992 ) stripped of peptide were directly refined against the glycopeptide data using X-PLOR v3.851 (Brünger et al. 1987 ). Rigid body refinement from 8–2.1 Å resolution (F/σF  > 2) gave an Rcryst  of 36.6% and an Rfree  of 35.7%. One round of refinement, bulk-solvent correction, and model rebuilding was performed using positional minimization and iterative slow-cooled molecular dynamics as implemented in X-PLOR (serial slow coolKleywegt and Jones 1997 ) before the peptide was traced (Rcryst  27.5%, Rfree  32.5%). 3Fo -2Fc , 2Fo -Fc  shake omit (McRee 1993 ), and shaken, σA -weighted (Read 1986 ) 2Fo -Fc  and Fo -Fc  electron density maps were computed to reduce phase bias for model rebuilding. Strong density in shaken, σA -weighted Fo -Fc  maps was located within the peptide binding groove and included the entire glycosylated homocysteine at position six (HggP6; Figure 2 ). HggP6 was constructed with the help of the hetero-compound libraries (e.g., homocysteine and galactose) provided by G. Kleywegt’s web site (http://alpha2.bmc.uu.se/hicup ; Kleywegt 1995 ). The Rfree  for the outer reflection bin failed to decline, probably due to limited data completeness; therefore, the high resolution limit was reduced to 2.2 Å (Table 3 ). The coordinates and reflection data (keeping the same Rfree  data partition) were converted for use in the SHELXL automated water divining routine (Sheldrick and Schneider 1997 ) and 108 waters were retained after manual inspection. The final rounds of positional and B-value refinement in X-PLOR gave an Rcryst  of 22.4% and an Rfree  of 27.9% (Table 3 ).  Structural Analysis and Illustrations The H-2Kb  glycopeptide structure was compared with other Kb /peptide complexes (PDB accession codes 2VAA, 2VAB; Fremont et al. 1992 ), the H-2Db /peptide complex (1HOCYoung et al. 1994 ), the H-2Ld /peptide complex (1LDPSpeir et al. 1998 ), the HLA-A2/Influenza M1 peptide complex (1HHIMadden et al. 1993 ), and various complexes of HIV-derived peptides bound to HLA molecules B35, B53, and B8 (1AGEReid et al. 1996 ; 1A1MSmith et al. 1996a ; 1A1NSmith et al. 1996b ). PROCHECK (Laskowski et al. 1993 ) was used to examine polypeptide geometry, PROMOTIF to identify secondary structure elements (Hutchinson and Thornton 1996 ), CONTACSYM (Sheriff et al. 1987 ) to identify van der Waals contacts up to 4 Å apart, and HBPLUS (McDonald and Thornton 1994 ) to locate hydrogen bond pairs using both distance and geometry criteria. Buried surface areas were computed with MS (Connolly 1983 ) using a 1.4 Å radius probe. Figure 2  was created using programs O (Jones et al. 1991 ) and MolView (Smith 1995 ). Figure 3  was created using MIDAS (Ferrin et al. 1988 ).§ To whom correspondence should be addressed (email: mikael.jondal@mtc.ki.se [M. J.], wilson@scripps.edu [I. A. W.]).      Acknowledgements We thank Wendy Havran for critically reading the manuscript and helpful discussions, Andreas Heine for assistance with program SHELXL, and David Jewell for technical assistance. This study was supported by National Institutes of Health grants CA58896 (I. A. W.), AI42266 (I. A. W.), and a postdoctoral fellowship from National Institutes of Health training grant MH19185 (J. A. S.). This is manuscript #11737-MB from The Scripps Research Institute.   
