 Trypanosoma cruzi  is the causative agent of Chagas’ disease, which is still endemic throughout much of Central and South America [1] . The parasite has a complex life-cycle in which several morphologically distinct forms alternate between blood-sucking insects and mammalian hosts [2,3] . These various developmental stages are confronted with a range of environments, some extremely hostile. Epimastigotes must resist the hydrolytic action of digestive enzymes in the insect intestinal tract, bloodstream trypomastigotes have to evade complement-mediated lysis and other immune defence mechanisms, and amastigotes need to survive and replicate inside their host cells. Components of the parasite cell surface provide crucial protection against these hostile environments, and actively mediate processes such as cellular invasion and intracellular survival [4] . The immunological properties of surface molecules of T. cruzi  are likely to be of particular relevance, since many of the pathological features of chronic Chagas’ disease may result from autoimmune processes, perhaps originating from molecular mimicry between parasite antigens and host tissues [5] . Surface molecules of T. cruzi  which have been characterized include trans-sialidase [6] , mucin-like glycoproteins [7] , glycoinositol phospholipids [8] , inositol phosphoceramides [9] , and glycosphingolipids [10] . Surprisingly little recent attention has, however, been devoted to the phospholipids of Trypanosoma cruzi , even though it is increasingly recognised that membrane lipids are not simply structural components, but are active participants in processes such as signal transduction and are the precursors of biologically active molecules including diacylglycerols, platelet activating factor (PAF), and eicosanoids. In the present paper we report the characterization of a major phospholipid from the Dm 28c clone of T. cruzi  by thin-layer chromatography (TLC), gas-chromatography mass spectrometry (GC/MS), fast atom bombardment mass spectrometry (FAB MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Materials All solvents were of reagent grade and were obtained from Merck and re-distilled before use. Phospholipid standards and phospholipase A2  were purchased from Sigma. Silica gel 60 and high performance thin-layer chromatography (HPTLC) plates were obtained from Merck. Human sera were obtained from five confirmed cases of chronic Chagas’ disease and from two healthy controls.  2.2 Culture of parasites The Dm 28c clone of Trypanosoma cruzi [11]  was obtained from the Department of Protozoology, FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Parasites were grown at 25°C in brain heart infusion medium (Becton Dickinson, USA), supplemented with 10% (v/v) foetal calf serum (Fazenda Pigue, Brazil) and 10 mg l−1  haemin. Epimastigotes were harvested by centrifugation in early stationary phase (7 days growth), washed three times with isotonic buffered saline and stored at −20°C.  2.3 Extraction and purification of phospholipids Epimastigote cells (100 g, wet weight) were extracted for 24 h at −10°C with 100 ml of acetone, then for 2 h at room temperature with successive volumes of chloroform/methanol (2:1 and 1:2 v/v). Crude lipid was obtained by evaporation of the combined extracts, and was partitioned according to Folch et al. [12] . Material recovered from the lower phase was separated by silica gel 60 chromatography into neutral, glyco- and phospholipid fractions as previously described [13] . The resulting phospholipids were applied to a column of silica gel 60 and eluted with 200 ml volumes of chloroform/methanol (95:5, 90:10, 80:20, and 50:50 (v/v) and finally with methanol. The methanol fractions were pooled and subjected to a final purification on silica gel 60 in which the column was sequentially eluted with 100 ml portions of chloroform/methanol (80:20 and 50:50 v/v) and lastly with methanol. Fractions (5 ml) were collected and monitored by TLC. The major phospholipid was obtained as a single component in fractions 12 and 13 of the 50:50 chloroform/methanol eluate.  2.4 Thin layer chromatography Analytical TLC was performed on silica gel G plates (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). developed with chloroform/methanol/water (65:25:4, v/v/v). The separated components were visualized with iodine vapour, ninhydrin [14] , and ammonium molybdate reagent [15] . For two dimensional TLC the first dimension was developed with chloroform/methanol/28% ammonium hydroxide (65:35:5, v/v/v) and the second with chloroform:acetone:methanol:acetic acid: water (5:2:1:1:0.5, v/v/v/v/v) [16] . The separated phospholipids were visualized by spraying with ammonium molybdate.  2.5 High performance thin layer chromatography immunostaining The total lipid fraction was separated by HPTLC using chloroform/methanol/water (65:25:4 v/v) as solvent system. The developed plates were soaked in 0.5% polymethacrylate in diethyl ether, blocked for 2 h with 10% skimmed milk in phosphate-buffered saline and incubated overnight with sera from either chagasic patients or healthy volunteers, followed by sequential treatment with peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-human IgG (2 h) and diaminobenzidine, as described by Straus et al. [17] . The reaction was terminated after 5 min by washing with distilled water. Reactive components were indicated by the development of brown bands on the HPTLC plates.  2.6 Acid methanolysis The purified phospholipid was methanolysed overnight at 80°C in 1 M methanol: HCl made 10 M with respect to water [18] , cooled and extracted twice with an equal volume of hexane. The combined hexane extracts were dried and analysed by GC/MS.  2.7 Phospholipase A2  digestion. The purified phospholipid (0.15 mg) was dissolved in 2 ml of diethyl ether/methanol (98:2) and 10 units of Crotalus atrox phospholipase A2 (Sigma P-3770) in 0.5 ml of borate buffer pH 8.9 was added [19] . Dipalmitoyl phosphatidylethanolamine was used as a positive control. After incubation overnight (37°C, with agitation) the ether was removed by vacuum centrifugation, and the digestion products were recovered by Bligh-Dyer extraction and analysed by FAB MS.  2.8 Gas chromatography mass spectrometry GC/MS was performed with a Kratos MS80 RFA spectrometer (Kratos Manchester, UK) interfaced to a Carlo Erba 5160 chromatograph fitted with a BPX-5 fused silica column (25 m by 0.2 mm; SGE, Milton Keynes, UK). Helium (0.7 ml min−1 ) was the carrier gas, and samples were introduced by ‘splitless’ injection. Electron ionization spectra were recorded at an ionization energy of 70 eV, trap current of 100 μA, and source temperature of 220°C. Chemical ionization spectra were obtained using isobutane reagent gas and an emission current of 250 mA.  2.9 Fast atom bombardment-mass spectrometry Fast atom bombardment (FAB) spectra were obtained in positive and negative ion modes with a Kratos MS80 spectrometer, fitted with an IonTech saddle-field atom gun supplied with high-purity xenon gas. Approximately 10 μg of sample was loaded into 3-nitrobenzyl alcohol matrix. Collision induced dissociation was achieved by admitting helium into a collision cell in the field-free region between source and electrostatic analyser so as to attenuate the ion beam by 50%. Constant neutral loss and daughter ion spectra were recorded by means of computer generated linked scans.  2.10 Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy Proton (500 MHz, 25°C) and 13 C NMR spectra (125 MHz, 25°C) were acquired on a Varian Unity 500 MHz spectrometer using the manufacturer’s standard pulse sequences. Samples were dissolved in CDCl3  containing a trace of CD3 OD or CDCl3  and CD3 OD (1:2 v/v). 1 H and 13 C chemical shifts are reported relative to tetramethylsilane at 0 ppm.   3 Results 3.1 Isolation of phospholipids Phospholipids were extracted from epimastigotes of the Dm 28c clone of T. cruzi  with chloroform/methanol, and were purified by Folch partition and silica chromatography. Twenty milligrams of purified material were obtained from 100 g (wet weight) of biomass. The unknown phospholipid was similar in one-dimensional TLC mobility to a phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) standard (Fig. 1  A and B) and stained positively with ninhydrin, iodine, and ammonium molybdate reagents. Two dimensional TLC, however, resolved the compound from phosphatidylethanolamine (Fig. 1 C). The phospholipid was derived from the T. cruzi  biomass, since it was not detected in control extractions of the culture medium alone.  3.2 Gas chromotography mass spectrometry analysis of the methanolysed phospholipid The phospholipid was methanolysed under acid conditions, and the products were analysed by GC/MS. Four peaks (I–IV) were observed in the chromatogram in an intensity ratio of ≈1:0.2:1:1; two of these (III and IV) were late-eluting and poorly resolved under the conditions used. The minor peak (II) was intermediate in retention time between peak I and peaks III and IV. The pair of late-eluting peaks had mass spectra typical of methyl esters of unsaturated long chain fatty acids. The earlier-eluting of the two (III) had a molecular ion (M+ ) at m /z  294, and an ion at m /z  263 (M-31), the latter comparable in intensity to M+ . The low mass end of the spectrum was dominated by a series of ions at m /z  67 (base peak), m /z  81, m /z  95 etc. The spectrum thus confirmed the identity of this component as octadecadienoic acid [20] . Peak IV had an M+  at m /z  296, an M-32 ion at m /z  264, (more abundant than the molecular ion), and a low mass ion series at m /z  55 (base peak), m /z  69, m /z  83 etc. which identified it as octadecenoic acid. No attempt was made to determine the locations of the double bonds in either compound. The spectrum of peak II was consistent with the methyl ester of a saturated fatty acid (M+  at m /z  270, ions at m /z  241, 239, and 227; base peak at m /z  74, and was assigned as methyl hexadecanoate. The mass spectrum of the other major peak in the methanolysate did not resemble that of a fatty acid but was consistent with a long chain aldehyde as would be obtained from hydrolysis of a plasmenyl linkage (Fig. 2  A). A weak ion was observed at m /z  240, the mass of hexadecanal, and was accompanied by fragments at m /z  222, 212, and 296 (loss of H2 O, CO, and CH3 CO, respectively), all fragmentation processes characteristic of aliphatic aldehydes [21] . In the corresponding chemical ionization spectrum, the base peak was observed at m /z  241, consistent with the protonated molecule of hexadecanal (Fig. 2 B). The electron ionization and chemical ionizaton spectra obtained from a tetradecanal standard of were similar except that the corresponding protonated molecules and fragment ions were observed 28 m /z  units lower in mass.  3.3 Fast atom bombardment mass spectroscopy analysis A doublet of de-protonated molecules ([M-H]− ), approximately equal in abundance, was observed at m /z  698 and 700 in the negative ion FAB spectrum of the intact phospholipid (Fig. 3  ), together with a pair of signals at m /z  279 and 281, also similar to each other in intensity. The latter were consistent with carboxylate anions derived from octadecenoic (18:1) and octadecadienoic (18:2) substituents. In the positive ion FAB spectrum, corresponding [M+H]+  ions were present at m /z  700 and 702, but were accompanied by more abundant [M+Na]+  and [M-H+Na2 ]+  signals at m /z  722/744, and 744/746, respectively. A doublet of fragment ions at m /z  561 and 559 was consistent with loss of an ethanolamine phosphate headgroup (141) from the protonated molecules. This was verified by a constant neutral loss scan, which confirmed that the peaks at m /z  559 and 561 originated by elimination of 141 from the protonated molecules at m /z  700 and 702. The data thus indicate the presence of both phosphoethanolamine and hydroxyester-linked C18:1  and C18:2  fatty acids. The observed [M+H]+  is not, however, consistent with a phosphatidyl ethanolamine having this substitution pattern, for which the calculated mass would be 742. The spectra are more compatible with a plasmenyl ethanolamine, in which carbon 1 of sn -glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine bears an O -(1-hexadecenyl) residue, and the sn -2 position is esterified with a mixture of octadecenoic and octadecadienoic acids. This structure would yield on hydrolysis an equimolar mixture of hexadecanal, octadecanoate, and octadecadienoate acid, in agreement with the results of the GC/MS experiments. The acid lability of the compound similarly excludes an alkylglycerol structure, which would be stable to the acid hydrolysis conditions employed. When the compound was treated with phospholipase A2 , and reanalysed by negative ion FAB MS, the doublet at m /z  698/700 disappeared, and was replaced by a singlet at m /z  436.3, consistent with removal of octadecanoate and octadecadienoate, thus establishing an sn -1,2-diradyl glycerol stereochemisty. Further confirmation of the structure was provided by the helium collisional activation spectrum of the protonated molecules at m /z  700 and 702 (both ions fell within the precursor ion window because of the poor parent-ion resolution of the B/E scan on a two sector instrument). In addition to daughter ions at m /z  559 and 561, attributable to loss of the phosphoethanolamine head group, a further doublet of fragment ions was observed at m /z  337 and 339, which were the result of cleavage of the sn -1 O-CH bond (with hydrogen transfer to glycerol) combined with loss of ethanolamine phosphate. Consistent with previous reports of the FAB spectra of plasmalogens, both in-source and collision-induced loss of phosphoethanolamine was considerably less facile than in the spectra of phosphatidylethanolamines [22,23] .  3.4 Nuclear magnetic resonance analysis of the phospholipid Proton and carbon spectra were assigned using two-dimensional NMR techniques; double quantum filtered correlation spectroscopy (DQCOSY) and total correlation spectroscopy (TOCSY) for the 1 H spectrum and heteronuclear multiple quantum correlated spectroscopy (HMQC) for the 13 C spectrum. The chemical shifts listed in Table 1   were obtained in CDCl3  at 25°C: Both the 1 H and 13 C spectra are consistent with the structure deduced from the mass spectrometric analysis and the chemical shifts were in agreement with the published values of a synthetic plasmenylcholine model system [24] , except for differences attributable to the presence of a phosphoethanolamine rather than a phosphocholine polar head group. The relative positions of the double bonds in octadecadienoic acid are revealed by the chemical shift of signals from protons attached to carbon 32 (arbitrary numbering; Fig. 4  ), consistent with a bisallylic methylene; which are correlated by COSY cross-peaks to the envelope of methine resonances at 5.35 ppm.  3.5 High performance thin layer chromatography immunostaining Immunostaining of the HPTLC-separated total lipid extract showed that only the band corresponding to the plasmenyl ethanolamine was recognised by sera from patients with Chagas’ disease (Fig. 5  ).   4 Discussion This study describes the purification and molecular characterization of a novel phospholipid from T. cruzi  strain Dm 28c, which we show by FAB MS and NMR is a plasmenylethanolamine with a hexadec-1-enyl group in the sn -1 position and an approximately equimolar mixture of octadecenoate and octadecadienoate esterified to the sn -2 hydroxyl. Plasmalogens are a unique class of glycerophospholipids with an alk-1-enyl ether substituent on the sn -1 position of glycerol [25] . The molecular geometry of the alk-1-enyl ether linkage is significantly different to that found in diacyl phospholipids, resulting in altered packing within the lipid bilayer [26] , and modifying the phase transition behaviour of the membrane [27] . In activated neutrophils plasmenylethanolamine catabolism can result in enhanced production of platelet activating factor (PAF) via a novel remodelling pathway [28] . Plasmalogen catabolism in activated neutrophils has also been shown to lead to the production of a plasmenyl analogue of PAF [29] , though this compound is apparently about five times less active than PAF [30] , and its role remains to be determined. Plasmalogens have previously been reported in rumen protozoa [31–33] , and in the trypanosomatids Blastocrithidia culicis [34] , Leishmania [35] , and Trypanosoma brucei [36] . In the latter organism ≈60% of the glycerophosphoethanolamine fraction belonged to the alk-1-enyl-2-acyl class, of which, in bloodstream forms, plasmenylethanolamine comprised a single molecular species, which was substituted with octadecanoic and octadecadienoic acids in the sn -1 and sn -2 positions, respectively [36] . Most reports of the phospholipid composition of T. cruzi  have made no mention of plasmalogens [37–40] , though an early paper provided indirect evidence for the presence of plasmenylethanolamine in the Tulahuen strain [41] . The present study is therefore the first instance of detailed chemical characterization of plasmalogens from this organism. No convincing function has yet been assigned to the plasmalogens of protozoa. In contrast to mammalian plasmalogens, those of protozoa are not usually enriched in arachidonate, and thus their hydrolysis may not result in the release of biologically active eicosanoids. It may however be significant that plasmenylethanolamine can enhance PAF production, since it has been shown that PAF encourages cell differentiation in T. cruzi  strain Dm28c [42]  and in Herpetomonas muscarum [43] , and that both parasites have specific receptors for PAF. It is possible that parasite plasmalogens have a protective function, since they have been shown to be effective scavengers of reactive oxygen species [44,45]  and might thus prevent killing by the oxidative burst. In the present study we show that the major plasmenylethanolamine of the Dm28c clone of T. cruzi  is recognised by antibodies in human serum which are present at elevated levels in patients with chronic Chagas’ disease. Anti-phospholipid antibodies have been associated with infection [44] , inflammation, immunological diseases, and conditions such as pregnancy and ageing [45] . In general antibodies are directed against cardiolipin, or more rarely phosphatidylcholine [46] . To our knowledge this is the first report of the detection of anti-plasmenylethanolamine antibodies. Most morbidity and mortality in Chagas’ disease is a consequence of the cardiac myopathy associated with the chronic phase of the disease, which affects 20–30% of seropositive patients years after their initial infection. It has been suggested the mechanism of cardiac damage is autoimmune in nature, as is the associated destruction of the autonomic nerve supply to the affected organs. Cross reactive antibodies have been described between T. cruzi  epitopes and a 43 kDa muscle protein [47] , laminin [48] , tubulin [49] , muscle sarcoplasmatic reticulum antigen [50] , ribosomal proteins [51] , antigens of nervous tissues [52]  cholesterol sulphate [53] , cardiac glycosphingolipids [54] , and the AAALDK motif of cardiac myosin heavy chain [55] . Many of these are of dubious clinical relevance, because of poor correlation with the different forms of chronic disease, lack of specificity of self-antigen to the target organs, or because the cross reactive antigens are also present in sera from uninfected individuals. The observation that the plasmenylethanolamine characterized in the present study is recognised by chagasic serum is intriguing, because plasmalogens are relatively minor constituents of most mammalian cell types but are abundant in the cardiac and neuronal tissues that are the main sites of damage in chronic Chagas’ disease. In most mammalian species heart muscle is markedly enriched in plasmalogens, (over 30% of total phospholipid in ox, rabbit, dog, and humans [24] ). In human heart the most abundant plasmalogen species are plasmenylethanolamines with predominantly hexadec-1-enyl substituents in the sn -1 position and a mixture of octadecenoyl, eicosenoyl, and arachidonoyl acyl groups on sn -2. The presence of these epitopes shared by parasite and host may thus provide an additional route for the development of the characteristic myopathy of chronic Chagas’ disease.   Acknowledgements This work was supported by grants from the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientı́fico e Tecnológico (CNPq), Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP), Conselho de Ensino e Pesquisa da UFRJ (CEPG), and Programa de Núcleos de Excelência (PRONEX). We thank Dr Barbara Mulloy (National Institute for Biological Standards and Control, UK) for the NMR spectroscopy and Maria de Fátima Ferreira Soares for technical assistance.   
