 Preclinical studies suggest that estrogenic hormones may affect central nervous system (CNS) function (Schneider and Finch, 1997 ), enhancing cholinergic and serotonergic mechanisms in the rat brain, modulating the growth and maintenance of neuronal cells in vitro, and ameliorating ovariectomy-induced learning deficits in rats. Nevertheless, the effect of estrogen on cognitive function in humans remains a matter of debate (Haskell et al., 1997; Plouffe and Schulkin, 1998; Yaffe et al., 1998 ). In postmenopausal women, modest improvements in certain aspects of cognitive function, particularly in verbal memory, have been demonstrated with estrogen in some small-scale randomized, placebo-controlled studies (Hackman and Galbraith, 1976; Sherwin, 1988; Phillips and Sherwin, 1992 ), but not others (Rauramo et al., 1975; Vanhulle and Demol, 1976; Ditkoff et al., 1991; Erkkola et al., 1998 ). Also, several epidemiological studies suggest that estrogen replacement therapy (ERT) may delay the onset of Alzhiemer’s disease (Paganini-Hill and Henderson, 1996; Kawas et al., 1997 ), although in other studies no effect was observed (Barrett-Connor and Kritz-Silverstein, 1993; Brenner et al., 1994 ). Thus, confirmation of any positive effect of estrogen on cognition, as well as clarification of its magnitude and clinical significance, must await completion of a large-scale, randomized, placebo-controlled, prospective trial (Yaffe et al., 1998 ). Raloxifene is a benzothiophene member of a new class of compounds termed selective estrogen receptor modulators, which bind with high affinity to the estrogen receptor, and can exert either agonist or antagonist effects in a tissue-dependent manner (Mitlak and Cohen, 1997 ). Studies in animals (Black et al., 1994 ) and clinical studies in postmenopausal women (Draper et al., 1996; Delmas et al., 1997; Walsh et al., 1998 ) have demonstrated that raloxifene prevents bone loss caused by loss of endogenous estrogen, favorably alters the serum lipid profile, and does not stimulate breast or uterine tissue. Based on this selective pharmacological profile, raloxifene has been approved for marketing in several countries for the prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis. Whether raloxifene affects human brain function or cognition is a topic of ongoing research. To test the hypothesis that raloxifene does not adversely affect cognition or mood in postmenopausal women, we assessed cognitive and affective function as secondary safety endpoints in a placebo-controlled osteoporosis treatment study with raloxifene. Computerized neuropsychological test batteries long-used in neuropharmacology research were used to monitor cognition and memory in postmenopausal women treated with raloxifene for 1 year. Although the effect of estrogen on these batteries has not been tested, they were chosen based on their reliability (Youngjohn et al., 1992a ) and validity (Youngjohn et al., 1992b ) in measuring independent aspects of cognition and memory. In addition, a test of affective function designed specifically for mature adults (Yesavage et al., 1983 ) was administered. The use of these well-established assessments of cognition and mood is particularly important, because in some previous studies of estrogen and cognition, tests of attention span and reaction time were erroneously used as tests of memory, and potentially important confounding factors such as mood were not assessed (Haskell et al., 1997 ). This report is the first of a series of investigations that, together, will determine the long-term effects of raloxifene on cognitive function and mood in postmenopausal women.  2 Methods 2.1 Patient population This study included postmenopausal women with established osteoporosis, 45–75 years of age, who had their last menstrual periods at least 5 years before the beginning of the study. All subjects were studied at Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN or Mayo Clinic Scottsdale, AZ. Patients were eligible if they were in good health except for osteoporosis, free of any serious acute or chronic medical condition that might affect bone or calcium metabolism, and fully ambulatory. Postmenopausal status was confirmed in women less than 60 years of age by serum estradiol ≤73 pmol/l and follicle stimulating hormone ≥30 IU/l. Osteoporosis was documented by diagnosis of at least one non-traumatic vertebral fracture and a bone mineral density of the lumbar spine or proximal femur of less than the tenth percentile of normal premenopausal women. Patients with bone disorders other than osteoporosis, clinically significant menopausal symptoms (hot flashes, sweating, etc.), any history of cancer (except superficial basal or squamous cell carcinoma of the skin) within the previous 5 years, acute or chronic liver disease, history of deep vein thrombosis or cerebral vascular accident, or impaired kidney function were not considered for enrollment in the study. Treatment with estrogen, progestin, calcitonin, androgen, or systemic corticosteroid more recently than 6 months prior to study was also grounds for exclusion. An informed consent document and study protocol were reviewed and approved by the appropriate ethical review board prior to initiation of the study. Informed consent was obtained from all study participants according to the ethical principles stated in the latest version of the Declaration of Helsinki.  2.2 Study design This was a Phase 2, two-site, parallel groups, placebo-controlled, randomized, double-blind study. Patients were randomly assigned to one of three treatment groups; placebo, raloxifene 60 mg/day, or raloxifene 120 mg/day. Outcome measures were recorded at baseline and at 1, 6, and 12 months after initiation of treatment.  2.3 Outcome measures Outcome measures included ten cognitive assessments and one assessment of mood. Seven of the cognitive outcome measures were derived from the MAC computerized psychometric battery while three were derived from the Walter Reed PAB. Both assessments measure components of cognitive function that have been shown to decline with advancing age. The Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS), a valid and reliable test designed specifically for the assessment of mood in the elderly (Yesavage et al., 1983 ), was also administered on each patient visit. The individual cognitive assessments within each battery are outlined below. The test batteries have been described in many previous publications (Thorne et al., 1985; Larrabee and Crook, 1988; Crook et al., 1990; Crook, 1992 ). 2.3.1 MAC battery This assessment battery was designed to simulate critical cognitive tasks of everyday life and has been shown to be reliable (Youngjohn et al., 1992a ) and valid (Crook and West, 1990; Youngjohn et al., 1992b ). The independent parameters of learning and memory tested by this battery are as follows:• name–face association: delayed recall and total acquisition (Crook and West, 1990 );  • first–last names: delayed recall and total acquisition (Youngjohn et al., 1991 );  • facial recognition: number before first error (Crook and Larrabee, 1992 );  • telephone number recall (ten digit): before interference and after interference (West and Crook, 1990 ).    The name–face association and first–last names recall tests measure primarily verbal memory, the facial recognition test measures primarily visual memory, and the telephone number recall test measures working memory; that is, encoding and manipulation of information for later use.  2.3.2 Walter Reed performance assessment battery (PAB) The Walter Reed PAB was developed by the United States Army and provides measures of various aspects of attention, information processing speed and efficiency, and reaction time (Thorne et al., 1985 ). These tests are particularly suited to detect even subtle influences of drugs on attention, vigilance, and information processing (Newhouse et al., 1989; Snyder and Henningfield, 1989 ). The three Walter Reed PAB assessments used in this study were:• two-letter search;  • six-letter search;  • four-choice serial reaction time.    Both assessment batteries were administered by a research assistant in a controlled testing environment and required 30–40 min to complete. Multiple, equivalent forms of both the MAC battery (Crook et al., 1992 ) and the Walter Reed PAB (Thorne et al., 1985 ) were administered such that subjects did not see the same stimuli more than once.   2.4 Evaluation of test batteries for sensitivity to cognitive impairment in healthy older adults Both test batteries employed have been used in multiple studies of drug effects on cognition (Newhouse et al., 1989; Crook and Lakin, 1991; Crook et al., 1991 ). However, many of these studies were conducted in populations with neurologic or psychiatric impairments. To assure sensitivity to cognitive impairment in the population under study with raloxifene, a preliminary sensitivity study was undertaken in a separate cohort of subjects. The ability of diazepam to induce deficits in memory and cognitive performance is well-established and, thus, was considered appropriate for comparison with placebo in this sensitivity study. Healthy subjects of either sex between 55 and 75 years of age (mean age=63) were tested with both the MAC battery and Walter Reed PAB at baseline (day 1). Subjects were treated with diazepam (4×5 mg/day) on days 2 and 3. On day 4, subjects were retested with both assessment batteries 1 h after a morning 5 mg dose of diazepam. Scores obtained on the test batteries at baseline and after diazepam therapy were compared. Diazepam induced clear performance deficits in all of the components of the MAC battery (Fig. 1  ). Significant performance deficits were also observed in the PAB (data not shown). Thus, the test batteries used in this study were considered appropriate for detection of negative drug effects in the population being studied.  2.5 Data analysis Analysis of drug effects on cognition in this study was based on a univariate analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) in which age and baseline score on each variable were entered as covariates and the single main effect was treatment. Overall ANCOVA comparisons were conducted comparing all three treatment groups on each variable. Data analysis was based on an intent-to-treat principle. Thus, all patients were included in the treatment group to which they were originally randomized. In cases where patients discontinued from the study early, values obtained from the last visit were carried forward to all subsequent analyses.   3 Results 3.1 Characteristics and disposition of study subjects Selected characteristics of the study subjects are summarized in Table 1  . Of the 143 patients randomized, 48 received placebo, 48 received raloxifene HCl 60 mg, and 47 received raloxifene HCl 120 mg. The raloxifene 60 mg group was slightly older than the other groups. This difference was controlled by entering age as a covariate in all comparisons among treatment groups. The overall mean age of study subjects was 68 years. The incidence of concomitant medication was not significantly different among treatment groups for any specific medication, including benzodiazepines, tricyclic antidepressants, antipsychotics, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. The percentage of women reporting an alcohol consumption of greater than three drinks per week was significantly different among the treatment groups (33, 15, and 20% in the placebo, raloxifene 60 mg, and raloxifene 120 mg, respectively; p =.022). Thirteen patients (9.1%) discontinued from the study before completing the 12 month treatment period. The number of discontinuations did not differ significantly among the treatment groups and did not alter the age distribution among groups for the intent-to-treat analyses. One women in the raloxifene 60 mg group died of unrelated causes (pneumonia), two discontinued for personal reasons, two for protocol variances, and eight because of adverse events. The percentage of women discontinuing due to an adverse event was not significantly different among treatment groups (6.3, 4.2, and 6.4% for placebo, raloxifene 60 mg, and raloxifene 120 mg, respectively; p =.87).  3.2 Baseline cognitive and mood assessment scores Unadjusted mean baseline scores for the cognitive assessments and GDS are summarized in Table 2  . Baseline performance in all assessments was not significantly different between the raloxifene and placebo groups.  3.3 Effect of raloxifene on cognitive assessment scores Scores (adjusted for age and baseline performance) for each assessment of the MAC battery at month 1, 6, and 12, are displayed in Fig. 2  . After 12 months of treatment with raloxifene, there were no significant differences on any of the seven MAC assessments between the raloxifene groups and placebo. Among all assessments and all time points, only one significant difference between the treatment groups was observed: delayed recall of first–last names after 1 month of treatment (Fig. 2 (B)). This difference resulted from high scores in the raloxifene 120 mg group. There were also no significant differences between treatment groups at any time point on any of the three Walter Reed PAB assessments tested (Table 3  ).  3.4 Effect of raloxifene on mood Patient scores on the Geriatric Depression Scale are shown for each assessment period in Table 4  . There were no significant differences between the raloxifene groups and the placebo group at any of the time points tested. In addition, the only self-reported adverse events related to mood were malaise and anxiety; the incidence of these events was low (<5%) and not significantly different among treatment groups. The incidence of hot flashes, an event that may have secondary effects on mood in postmenopausal women, was not significantly different among treatment groups (10.4, 14.6, and 12.8% for placebo, raloxifene 60 mg, and raloxifene 120 mg, respectively; p =.83).   4 Discussion This study was done to obtain preliminary safety assessments of possible effects of raloxifene on cognition and mood in women being studied for the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. In this study, two separate computerized batteries yielded ten separate measures of cognitive function. These batteries were administered on three occasions during the course of the study, providing 30 separate measures of cognitive abilities for treatment group comparisons. A mood scale brought the total number of comparisons to 33. From these 33 comparisons among the three treatment groups, only one significant difference emerged (first–last names delayed recall at 1 month). Beyond that, no consistent or meaningful trends were seen when examining differences among groups. Notably, the only significant difference between raloxifene and placebo observed in this study favored the raloxifene 120 mg group, and occurred on the test that appears to be most sensitive to drug-induced impairment (first–last names, delayed recall, Fig. 2 (B)). Together, these data do not support an effect of raloxifene to impair cognitive function in postmenopausal women treated for up to 12 months. Assessment of mood by the Geriatric Depression Scale revealed no significant differences between the raloxifene groups and the placebo group at any assessment point. Furthermore, self-reported incidences of adverse events related to mood also did not differ between treatment groups. Mood is known to affect performance on cognitive assessment batteries (Palinkas and Barrett-Connor, 1992 ), a factor that was not controlled for in some studies of estrogen and cognitive function (Hackman and Galbraith, 1976; Sherwin, 1988 ). Thus, alterations in mood did not confound the assessment of cognitive function in this study. Assessment of cognitive function was a secondary objective in this study with the primary endpoint of determining effects of the raloxifene on bone in osteoporosis. However, the test batteries used to assess cognitive function in this study are well-established and particularly sensitive to impairments in cognitive function (West and Crook, 1990; West et al., 1992 ). Indeed, diazepam induced rapid and significant impairments in performance on the MAC Battery in a patient cohort with similar baseline variability in cognitive performance, confirming the sensitivity of this battery to drug-induced cognitive impairments. The estrogen agonist and antagonist effects of raloxifene in the CNS are under investigation. In ovariectomized rats, raloxifene antagonized both estrogen-induced changes in serum luteinizing hormone (LH) levels (Clemens et al., 1983 ) and estrogen-stimulated expression of hypothalamic progesterone receptor message (Shughrue et al., 1997 ). Although these data suggest that raloxifene may have antiestrogenic activity at the level of the hypothalamus and/or pituitary in the rat brain, its effect on this brain region in humans remains unclear. In premenopausal women, raloxifene increased gonadotropin levels and decreased prolactin levels (Baker et al., 1998 ), suggestive of an estrogen-antagonist effect. Although not evident in the present study, raloxifene was reported to increase the incidence of hot flashes in postmenopausal women (Draper et al., 1996; Walsh et al., 1998 ). However, it has not been established that this effect is related to an antiestrogen action of raloxifene in the hypothalamus. Indeed, raloxifene significantly decreases the serum level of follicle stimulating hormone and had no effect on serum LH or prolactin levels in postmenopausal women (unpublished data), suggestive of either a neutral or weak estrogen agonist effect at the hypothalamic/pituitary axis. Importantly, preliminary results suggest that benzothiophene SERMs similar to raloxifene increase the expression of trkA (a nerve growth factor receptor component) and other estrogen-responsive genes in the hippocampus and cortex of ovariectomized rats, and differential display analysis revealed identical patterns of hippocampal mRNA expression induced by treatment of ovariectomized rats with estrogen and benzothiophene analogs of raloxifene (Bryant et al., 1997 ). Similar results have also been observed with raloxifene (H.U. Bryant, personal communication). These data are consistent with an estrogen agonist-like effect of raloxifene in the rat hippocampus and cortex. Thus, the effects of raloxifene on the brain are likely complex and may not be inferred solely from its actions on the hypothalamic/pituitary axis. The potential of raloxifene to improve cognitive performance, or to alter the time of onset or course of dementing disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, was beyond the scope of this safety study. However, it should be emphasized that, despite many reports in the popular media to the contrary, clinically important effects of estrogen on cognitive function have not been established in clinical trials (Haskell et al., 1997; Yaffe et al., 1998 ). Whereas some observational (Kampen and Sherwin, 1994 ) and controlled studies (Hackman and Galbraith, 1976; Phillips and Sherwin, 1992 ) suggest that estrogen may improve certain aspects of cognitive function in postmenopausal women, other studies failed to demonstrate any effect of estrogen (Rauramo et al., 1975; Vanhulle and Demol, 1976; Ditkoff et al., 1991; Barrett-Connor and Kritz-Silverstein, 1993; Erkkola et al., 1998 ). Many of these studies are difficult to compare due to different methodologies used to assess cognitive function, variation in study populations, and the failure of some studies to consider the positive effects of estrogen on mood as a contributor to improvements in cognitive function observed. Taken together, the literature suggests that estrogen therapy may produce modest improvements in certain aspects of cognitive function, but detecting these effects experimentally may be dependent upon the patient population studied and the techniques used to assess cognition. Studies to further assess the safety and potential efficacy of raloxifene with respect to cognitive function are ongoing.   Acknowledgements The authors thank Sushant D. Hardikar, PhD, for critically reviewing the manuscript.   
