 Bis(monoacylglycerol)phosphate (BMP) was first described in 1967 by Body and Gray [1] , and was shown by Waite et al. [2]  to be synthesized in alveolar macrophages from exogenous phosphatidylglycerol (PG). BMP is a unique phospholipid having a sn -1 rather than sn -3 glycerol phosphate ester [3]  and one acyl group attached to each of the glycerol moieties. While it is unclear whether the acyl esters are at the primary or secondary hydroxyl [4,5] , the acyl groups of BMP are unusually rich in polyunsaturated species [5–7]  which implies acyl linkage at the sn -2 and sn -2′ positions. We proposed a biochemical pathway by which BMP is synthesized but this remains to be proven (Scheme 1  ) [8] . Recent work within our laboratory has focused on characterizing the enzymes that are involved in the biosynthesis of BMP from PG. In this proposed pathway, PG, presumably from lung surfactant, is taken into the cell and metabolized to BMP. There is reason to suggest that BMP synthesis occurs in the endosomal system since a role for BMP in the endosomal function has recently been proposed [9] . The first proposed step in conversion to BMP is the hydrolysis of PG catalyzed by a lysosomal PLA2  to form 1-acyl-sn -glycero-3-phospho-rac -glycerol (LPG). In the second step, sn -3:sn -1′ LPG is acylated on the head group (prime designation) glycerol with an acyl group from a donor phospholipid. The next step proposed is the reorientation of the phosphoryl ester from the sn -3 to the sn -1 position, with liberation of the sn -1 linked acyl chain concomitant to the phosphoryl migration [10] . While this proposal provides the energy and specificity for the transfer of the phosphate to the sn -1 position, it has yet to be demonstrated in a cell homogenate. The final proposed step is a second transacylation to incorporate an acyl chain into the original backbone glycerol (non-prime designation) of sn -1:sn -1′ LPG. If the sn -2 chain of a phospholipid were the substrate for the transacylation steps, the final BMP structure would contain the expected polyunsaturated fatty acid. Various groups have shown that diacyl phospholipid stimulates the conversion of sn -3:sn -1′ LPG to sn -3:sn -1′ BMP (Scheme 1  step 2). Our studies [8]  showed that the lipid product of the reaction catalyzed by the partially purified transacylase was BMP, as predicted in Scheme 1 . Matsuzawa et al. [11]  earlier reported that PI was preferentially used by a rat liver lysosomal transacylase to form BMP, whereas the work of Huterer and Wherett [12]  indicated that the acyl moiety from either the sn -1 or sn -2 position of PC was incorporated into BMP. Huterer et al. [13]  proposed that the lysosomal PLA1  is also a transacylase and could be responsible for the formation of BMP and acylphosphatidylglycerol (APG). The stereoconfiguration of the BMP formed was not determined in the later reports. Considering the differences in these reports, we felt it necessary to more clearly define the transacylation step (Scheme 1  step 2). In particular, we set out to establish what the substrate(s) for the reaction are and if indeed the presence of polyunsaturated fatty acids in BMP was accounted for by this transacylation. To our surprise LPG served as both the acyl donor and acyl acceptor, even though diradyl phospholipid enhanced activity several-fold. The data supporting this conclusion are reported herein.  2 Methods and materials 2.1 Materials RAW 264.7 (murine monocytic, macrophage like, Abelson leukemia virus transformed BALB/c) cells were purchased from American Type Tissue Culture. Tissue culture medium was from Gibco. Phospholipids (except for RAW 264.7 lipid) were from Avanti Polar Lipids. Salts, buffers, and organic solvents were from Fisher. Protein assay reagents were from Pierce and microconcentrators were from Amicon. S-300 column matrix was from Pharmacia. Silica gel G plates were from Analtech. Preparative enzymes were from Sigma. The 1-acyl[1,2,3-3 H]-sn -glycero-3-phospho-rac -glycerol ([3 H]LPG) was synthesized as described earlier [14] .  2.2 Cell culture RAW 264.7 cells were grown in Dulbecco’s minimum essential medium with 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 4.5 g/l of d -glucose, 584 mg/l of l -glutamine, 110 mg/l of sodium pyruvate, 4 mg/l of pyridoxal HCl, 10% heat inactivated FBS (by volume) in an atmosphere supplemented with 5% CO2 . These cells were grown to confluence in 15 ml of medium in a 75 cm2  flask, then passaged into 150 ml of medium in 225 cm2  plates. Once the population reached 1×108  total cells, the cells were passed into 200 ml of medium and transferred to a 500 ml cell culture stir bottle and placed in a second incubator. Since this incubator did not have a CO2  atmosphere supplementation system, the medium buffering capacity was increased with additional HEPES (pH 7.4, 20 mM). Suspension cultures were initiated with 5×105  cells/ml and allowed to proliferate until reaching approx. 2×106 /ml. They were then passed into 600 ml of medium in a 1 l culture bottle and allowed to grow until the population reached 6×108  cells at which time the cells were taken for LPG transacylase (TA) isolation.  2.3 Transacylase isolation RAW 264.7 (6×108 ) cells were pelleted from medium by centrifugation at 1000×g , resuspended, then washed twice by centrifugation in ice cold 0.9% saline. Cells were resuspended in 5 ml of 1 mM NaHCO3  and lipids were removed by adding an equal volume of water-saturated 1-butanol. The mixture was vortexed for 15 s, placed on ice for 2 min, then the phases were separated by centrifugation at 20 000×g  for 15 min at 4°C. The aqueous (lower) layer was applied to an S-300 column (1.5 cm×84 cm) which had been previously equilibrated in 10 mM Tris, pH 7.4, and eluted with the same buffer at a flow rate of 0.55 ml/min. Fifty fractions of 2.2 ml were collected from the S-300 column, assayed for TA activity, and those fractions exhibiting TA activity were pooled. Pooled TA intended for experiments utilizing gas chromatography (GC) or mass spectrometry (MS) analysis were concentrated using an Amicon filtration system. Pooled fractions were then assayed for total protein concentration.  2.4 Transacylase assay For each assay, 10 nmol of diradyl lipid, [3 H]LPG (5×104  DPM, 200 pmol) and 10 nmol of 1-myristoyl LPG were dried under a stream of N2  and 0.1 ml of 1 M Na acetate, pH 4.5 was added. The lipids were sonically dispersed and 0.1 ml of the solution was aliquoted to the various tubes. Seventy-five μg of the TA were added to each tube, the reaction volume was adjusted to 1 ml with water, and samples were incubated for 1 h at 37°C. The reactions were stopped and the lipids extracted by the method of Bligh and Dyer [15] . The organic phase was evaporated under N2 , and lipids were spotted on a silica G plate in methanol and separated by a thin layer chromatography (TLC) system containing chloroform/methanol/ammonium hydroxide (130:70:10 v/v/v) (R f  values: LPG 0.27, PG 0.40, BMP 0.53). Radioactive lipids were visualized by scanning the TLC plate using a Bioscanner detector and compared to authentic standards. Silica, containing the radioactive products, was scraped from the plate into a scintillation vial and then counted in a liquid scintillation counter and TA activity was determined as the percentage of the radiolabeled BMP formed compared to the sum of radioactivity from the silica plate plus the methanol/water phase of the extract. This percentage was converted to mass based on the specific radioactivity of the substrate. Due to enzyme instability, experiments were completed within 1–2 days of preparation. Even so, considerable variability in specific enzymatic activity existed between preparations.  2.5 Gas chromatographic analysis Fatty acid methyl esters were prepared and examined by the method of Wang and Peter [16] . The lipids were separated by TLC and 5 μg of pentadecanoic acid (C15:0) in hexane was pipetted onto each zone of the silica plate to be scraped. In these and experiments employing MS, a trace amount of [3 H]LPG was included to localize BMP on the TLC plate. One ml of 7% HCl in MeOH was added to the scraped silica, vortexed, and heated to 100°C for 15 min. After cooling to 0°C, 2 ml of hexane were added followed by the addition of 1 ml of 2.5 N NaOH. The hexane was collected, the samples were extracted again with 2 ml of hexane and the hexane was dried under N2 . The fatty acid methyl esters were dissolved in 100 μl of undecane and analyzed by gas chromatography/flame ionization detection (GC/FID).  2.6 MS analysis MS analysis was conducted by the method of Lehmann [17] . BMP was isolated by TLC, dissolved in 250 μl of MeOH:MeCl2  1:1, injected into a VG Quattro II triple quadrupole mass spectrometer, and resultant data analyzed using Masslynx software. Both parent and daughter ions were detected over a range from 200 to 900 m/z. Ion spectra were assigned acyl compositions based on detected ion molecular weight and previously determined standards. Parent ions were detected in the first quadrupole, ionized in the second quadrupole and daughter ions corresponding to acyl chains esterified on BMP detected in the third quadrupole.   3 Results Studies reported thus far have not established systematically the optimal conditions for the TA. For these studies, it is important to remove contaminating phospholipases that may hydrolyze substrates and/or products. Previous work from our lab demonstrates that lysosomal PLA activity was minimal in our transacylase preparation and that no ATP and CoA dependent transacylases were present [8] . We first demonstrated that the reaction was linear for 30 min using our standard assay conditions, and although at a somewhat decreased rate, the enzyme was active up to 90 min (data not shown). Optimal activity was observed between pH 4.0 and 5.5, as previously reported with lower concentrations of substrate [8] . We also showed using 10 or 30 μM LPG that lipids extracted from the RAW 264.7 cells stimulated the TA in concentrations up to 50 μM. Since it would be difficult to define the substrates involved in transacylation using total lipid extracts, we used synthetic substrates with defined acyl groups, with the exception of the [3 H]LPG which contained mainly palmitate. The [3 H]LPG used was present in trace amounts, being diluted approx. 100-fold with synthetic 1-myristoyl LPG. Using LPG and either 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn -glycero-3-phosphocholine (POPC) or 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn -glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (POPE), we find a concentration dependence of both the LPG and the POPC (Fig. 1A,B  ). On the other hand, POPE did not stimulate the transacylase (Fig. 1B ). The concentration dependence of LPG and POPC showed that both were required in concentrations above 1–3 μM before stimulation was seen. The complexity of substrate dependence suggests that the physical state of the substrate may regulate the TA. In order to better define the properties of the reaction we investigated the effects of detergents on transacylation (Fig. 2A  ). Only the bile acids deoxycholic acid (DOC) or cholic acid (CHO) were seen to stimulate activity and both Tween 20 and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide markedly inhibited at 20 μM. The stimulation by DOC was optimal between 10 and 500 μM while it became inhibitory above that concentration (Fig. 2B ). At pH 4.5 DOC and CHO are protonated. This reduces their critical micellar concentration and may account for their stimulatory properties. We next sought to determine the effects on transacylation of various phospholipids in the presence of 20 μM DOC (Fig. 3  ). The purpose of these experiments was to determine whether phospholipid had an additional stimulatory effect beyond that of DOC and to determine whether phospholipid that lacked an acyl group in sn -1 and sn -2 positions would stimulate the TA. In this case a plasmalogen rich PE from brain was stimulatory. Perhaps the most striking feature of Fig. 3  is the stimulation by 1,2-dihexadecyl-sn -glycero-3-phosphocholine (dialkyl PC), a phospholipid with ether rather than ester bonds that cannot undergo transacylation. This indicates that the stimulatory effect of diradyl phospholipids on transacylation may not be as a substrate but provides a favorable lipid milieu. Since the lipids used in these studies have defined acyl groups, we determined whether an acyl group is transferred from PC by fatty acid analysis of the product BMP. Fig. 4   shows the acyl composition of the BMP in which 1-myristoyl LPG and POPC were used as substrates (from Fig. 1 ). As determined by the GC, myristate was the predominant fatty acid present in BMP with only a trace of the acyl groups, palmitate and oleate, from the POPC being used in the biosynthesis of BMP. These data show that PC does not participate significantly as substrate in transacylation. This observation is consistent with the finding that dialkyl PC can stimulate transacylation (Fig. 3 ). The results of Fig. 4  were verified using lipids with different acyl chains to rule out the possibility that the TA was selecting only myristate. When 1-palmitoyl LPG and 1-myristoyl-2-stearoyl-sn -glycero-3-phosphocholine (MSPC) were used in combination and the product BMP analyzed by electrospray tandem MS, the mass was 721, showing that BMP contained two palmitate chains (Fig. 5  ). In this experiment MSPC increased transacylation 3-fold which indicates that MSPC was capable of stimulation, but not acyl donation. Using MS we could also determine whether the TA has substrate specificity for the acyl chains. We analyzed BMP synthesized from reactions that contained dialkyl PC and mixed LPGs, in which the LPG contained either myristate, palmitate, stearate, or oleate on the sn -1 position. Fig. 6A   shows that all of the saturated fatty acyl moieties on LPG were present in BMP synthesized whereas monounsaturated oleate was not. (In other experiments, not shown, where a single species of LPG was used, 1-oleoyl LPG was transacylated to a low extent only.) The major BMP ion at 721 m/z could be a mixture of myristoyl/stearoyl BMP and dipalmitoyl BMP so the daughter ions were determined (Fig. 6B ). Although the daughter ion analysis is not strictly qualitative, it appears that the 721 m/z peak contains approximately equimolar amounts of myristate, palmitate, and stearate. Table 1   has the quantitative analysis of the data in Fig. 6A  and indicates that, assuming equal amounts of dipalmitoyl and myristoyl/stearoyl BMP are present in the 721 m/z peak, the TA has a slight preference for the longer chain species of LPG. We then examined the relative activity of 1-palmitoyl LPG vs. 2-oleoyl LPG (Fig. 7  ). We had studied their metabolism earlier with low concentrations of LPGs but without stimulatory diradyl phospholipid. In that case we found that the TA had approximately equal activity on the two LPG species [8] . For the study reported here, 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn -glycero-3-phospho-rac -glycerol (POPG) was hydrolyzed by either a lipase from Rhizopus arrhizus  var. delemer,  which yields 2-oleoyl LPG [18]  or porcine pancreatic PLA2 , which yields 1-palmitoyl LPG [19] . When used as substrates singly or in combination, the 1-palmitoyl LPG was the better substrate (Fig. 6 ). Ideally, the experiment should be conducted with the same acyl chain present in either the sn -1 or sn -2 position. Technically this was not possible. We cannot conclude, therefore, that the difference in transacylation using these two substrates is the sole result of the position of the acyl group. Since some 1-oleoyl LPG was transacylated in samples containing 1-oleoyl LPG and dialkyl PC (data not shown) it appears that the TA does not exclude naturally occurring 2-acyl LPG that has an unsaturated acyl chain as substrate. The question then arose, is the TA specific for LPG or can other lysolipids serve as substrates. Fig. 8   shows that none of the 1-acyl lysolipids examined were substrates at 10 or 100 μM concentrations. Further, when these lysolipids were mixed at a concentration equal to LPG, inhibition was seen. While not studied further, this could be a competitive type inhibition or the result of surface dilution of LPG in the lipid aggregate.  4 Discussion The results presented here show that the TA that converts LPG to BMP is intramolecular involving the transfer of the acyl group from one LPG to another. The enzyme, previously shown to be independent of ATP and CoA [8] , most likely involves an acyl enzyme intermediate, although this point cannot be proven since both acceptor and donor are always present. The physical state of the substrate appears to play a significant role in the reaction. The 1-myristoyl LPG is reported to have a high critical micellar concentration (CMC) ranging from 160 to 3000 μM, depending on the presence of salt [20] . Under the conditions used in our standard assay, 10 μM LPG, most substrate, if not all, is monomeric. The presence of diradyl lipid or bile acid would lead to partitioning of the LPG into a lipid aggregate such as a bilayer vesicle or a mixed micelle. If so, the enzyme appears to prefer a lipid/H2 O interface over monomolecular dispersions of LPG. The unusual dependence of transacylation on both the LPG and PC concentration is consistent with this interpretation (Fig. 1 ). Where increasing amounts of POPC (1–100 μM) are added to a fixed amount of LPG (30 μM; Fig. 1B ), two considerations must be made, first the intermicellar concentration (IMC) of LPG partitioning into POPC, and second the surface dilution of 1-myristoyl LPG in POPC. The fact that POPC does not increase transacylation until the threshold of 10 μM is reached, but continues to stimulate to 100 μM, suggests that the partitioning of LPG into the lipid interface, the IMC, has more influence on transacylation than does substrate dilution. Comparison of POPC and POPE (Fig. 1B ) also suggests that not all lipid/H2 O interfaces support transacylation. POPE, a lipid known to form a Hex II phase [21] , was without effect, either the result of little LPG partitioning into the POPE or a lipid polymorphic structure, presumably Hex II, that the TA is unable to productively bind. When a different matrix is present and PE is added with DOC, stimulation is observed (Fig. 3 ). We recognize that these interpretations are speculative without data on the lipid structures involved. They do provide, however, a reasonable approach to the understanding of the nature of the lipid mixtures used. Previous work by us and others suggested that the conversion of LPG to BMP involves transferring an acyl chain from a diacyl phospholipid [8,11–13] . Those results were obtained with sub-μM concentrations of LPG and transacylation was dependent on added phospholipid. No attempt was made in those experiments, however, to demonstrate the transfer of a radiolabeled fatty acid to BMP. In unpublished experiments we found that a few percent of radiolabeled fatty acid are transferred to BMP from diradyl phospholipids, relative to the total amount of BMP synthesized. How do the results presented here reconcile with those of others? One possible explanation is that multiple transacylases were present in the lysosomal preparation used by others, but not in our partially purified TA. For example, Huterer and Wherett showed that a preparation of rat liver lysosomes transferred [3 H]oleate from PC to form BMP [22] . However, the vast majority of the oleate was released as a free oleate and less than 1% was recovered in BMP. Further, the amount of BMP formed from LPG was far in excess of the amount of oleate incorporated. These data are consistent with our results here that show little, if any, BMP is formed by the transfer of an acyl group from diradyl lipids. The different transacylases described can be classified as follows:1. acyl-CoA acyltransferases;  2. CoA independent transacylases;  3. lysophospholipases;  4. LPG transacylases (TA).    The acyl-CoA acyltransferase employs an acyl-CoA formed by acyl-CoA synthetase in microsomes and is optimal at pH 7.5 [23] . These characteristics make it clearly different from the activity described here. The CoA independent transacylase is an enzyme that transfers an acyl group from the sn -2 position of a diradyl phospholipid to a lysolipid [24] . If that were the enzyme involved we would expect that PG would be formed from LPG yet none was detected (data not shown). The transfer of the acyl group only to the head group (prime) glycerol is different from other CoA independent transacylases. The third, lysophospholipase, has one similarity to the activity reported here; two molecules of the same lysolipid are used to form one diradyl phospholipid [25] . This enzyme is different from the TA in two important respects, however. First, we find no evidence for lysophospholipase activity in the TA, based on the lack of fatty acid released (data not shown). Second, the LPC:LPC transacylase has a broad substrate specificity and can use LPG, but in that case PG, not BMP, is formed [26] . The TA described here, therefore, appears to be unique. How do the findings reported here fit with the proposed role of the LPG transacylase in Scheme 1 ? Scheme 2   provides a modification of the TA reaction proposed in step 2 of Scheme 1 . Rather than utilizing a diacyl phospholipid in transacylation, a second molecule of LPG is the acyl donor with the production of glycerophosphoglycerol (GPG) in addition to BMP. The major factor that cannot be accommodated is the failure of the TA to use unsaturated fatty acids significantly. We must conclude that polyunsaturated fatty acids such as arachidonate [7]  or, in particular, docosahexanoate [27]  are incorporated by some other mechanism. Until the mechanism of stereochemical rearrangement is defined, this question of polyunsaturated fatty acid incorporation remains open.   Acknowledgements This work was supported in part by National Institutes of Health HL-50395 and National Cancer Institute Comprehensive Cancer Center of Wake Forest Grant CA-12197. Use of the Tissue Culture Core Laboratory is gratefully acknowledged. We especially thank Dr. Mike Thomas and Mike Samuel from Wake Forest University for their technical support in examining the MS samples, and Dr. Nick Ralston and Dr. Koji Shinozaki for their advice and assistance in the laboratory.   
