 We have recently shown that hepoxilin (Hx) A3  interacts with a specific binding protein in the intact human neutrophil resulting in the release of intracellular calcium [1] . In those studies we used the methyl (Me) ester form in DMSO because we found that the free acid (FA) was without effect in intact cells both in terms of binding and calcium release [2] . We also found that both the FA and Me ester (in DMSO) were active in specific binding to disrupted neutrophil membranes [3] . This suggested that the FA did not penetrate into the intact cell and that the binding protein was intracellular and not at the outside surface of the plasma membrane. We now describe new findings which support a binding/calcium release coupling where both the FA and the Me ester are found active (in ethanol vehicle) in the intact neutrophil and demonstrate a biphasic action of HxA3 , one in releasing calcium from intracellular stores, a second in increasing calcium influx.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Materials Pure 8(R)-HxA3  Me ester was prepared in our laboratory as previously reported [4] . The FA was prepared by hydrolysis of the Me ester with 1 N KOH/ethanol followed by mild acidification, extraction and further purification by chromatography [5] . [3 H6 ](8R)-HxA3  Me ester was prepared as previously reported [5] . Lanthanum chloride was purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA).  2.2 Preparation of human neutrophils Human neutrophils were prepared essentially as described previously [3] . Typically, neutrophils were obtained from 40 ml venous blood from volunteers that had not taken any medication. The blood was anti-coagulated with heparin sodium (Organon Tecknica, Durham, NC, USA). Erythrocytes were removed by 4.5% dextran sedimentation. Neutrophils were collected and pelleted after Ficoll-Paque gradient centrifugation. Further removal of contaminating erythrocytes was carried out by ammonium chloride lysis. After washing twice with centrifugation, neutrophils were resuspended in RPMI 1640 medium and were counted in a Coulter counter (Model 901). The cells were adjusted to a concentration of 107  cells/ml in RPMI 1640 medium.  2.3 Intracellular calcium release Freshly prepared neutrophil suspensions (1 ml: 1×107  cells) were loaded with 3 mM (final concentration 3 μM) of the acetoxymethyl ester precursor of the calcium indicator (Indo-1-AM, Calbiochem, La Jolla, CA, USA) during 30 min at 37°C. Excess dye was removed by centrifugation and the cells were suspended in fresh RPMI 1640 medium. Dye-loaded cells were kept at room temperature on a rotator. Each measurement consisted of the following: 2×106  cells were suspended in 1 ml of assay medium of the following composition in mM: NaCl 140, KCl 5, MgCl2  1, CaCl2  1, HEPES sodium-free 10 and glucose 10, pH 7.3 and placed in a plastic cuvette (Diamed Lab., Toronto, Canada) whose temperature was controlled at 37°C. Calcium-free media contained no calcium and 1 mM EGTA was added. The cell suspension was continuously stirred magnetically. Fluorescence was continuously monitored with a Perkin-Elmer fluorescence spectrophotometer (model 650-40) and recorded on a chart recorder (LKB model 2210) set at 1 cm/min. The excitation wavelength was set at 331 nm, the emission wavelength at 410 nm, with slits of excitation and emission set at 3 and 15 nm respectively. At the end of each test, a calibration was carried out to determine the maximal fluorescence by adding ionomycin (Sigma) at 1 mM (final concentration 1 μM) and minimal fluorescence by adding MnCl2  (final concentration 3 mM) as previously described [6] . Test compounds were prepared in DMSO (Caledon, Georgetown, OR, USA) or glass-distilled ethanol (100%) at a stock solution of 1 μg/μl or 5 μg/μl and 1 μl of this solution was added to 2×106  cells in 1 ml.  2.4 Metabolism of [3 H6 ]HxA3  Me ester Freshly prepared human neutrophils were incubated in the above assay medium in a siliconized glass tube to which had been added [3 H](8R)-HxA3  Me ester (5×106  cpm) diluted with 3 μg of the unlabelled compound. The mixture was incubated for 1 or 5 minutes and the incubation mixture was extracted with ethyl acetate without prior acidification to extract the intact Hx structure and its products (which are acid sensitive). The solvent was evaporated to dryness with N2  gas and the residue was dissolved in a small amount of ethyl acetate and spotted on TLC (silica gel G, ethyl acetate/acetic acid 99.5/0.5 (v/v)). The plate was developed for 60 min, then the solvent was dried with cold air and scanned for radioactivity on a TLC radiochromatogram scanner (Berthold). Authentic standards of HxA3  Me ester and FA as well as the ω-hydroxy (ωH) metabolite FA (product of ω-oxidation [7] ) and the trihydroxy metabolite FA (product of epoxide hydrolase) were spotted as reference compounds.   3 Results and discussion We show herein that HxA3  FA but not the Me ester is vehicle sensitive in evoking a rise in intracellular calcium in suspensions of human neutrophils. Fig. 1  A shows a typical pattern of intracellular calcium resulting from the addition of HxA3  Me ester (upper trace) and FA (lower trace) in DMSO as vehicle. This is compared with the same two compounds added in ethanol as vehicle (Fig. 1 B). The following three points are apparent. First, the pattern for the Me ester is similar and independent of the vehicle used (compare upper traces in Fig. 1 A and B). Second, the FA is inactive when made up in DMSO but is active when added in ethanol vehicle (compare lower traces in Fig. 1 A and B). Third, both compounds added in ethanol show a rapid action (rise in intracellular calcium) and a slower more prolonged decrease in calcium levels but never decreasing to pre-HxA3  levels (see Fig. 1 B). The Me ester appears more potent in the rapid initial phase of calcium release than the FA (Me, 188±14 S.D.; FA, 135±11 S.D. nM, P <0.0005, n =3) and decreases to a similar plateau level as with the FA (Me, 88±8 S.D.; FA, 107±15 S.D. nM, not significant, n =3). Hence, the decrease to the second phase (prolonged calcium rise) is greater with the Me ester (from 188 to 88 nM=53%) than with the FA (from 135 to 107 nM=20%). In order to address this second phase of calcium `retention', we administered lanthanum chloride (1 μM final concentration) at the plateau of the profile (about 5 min after the addition of HxA3 ). Lanthanum chloride blocks the entry of calcium by inhibiting calcium channels [8, 9] . Lanthanum caused an immediate decrease in intracellular calcium levels towards the baseline for both the Me ester as well as the FA (Fig. 1 B, upper and lower traces). In separate experiments (Fig. 1 C) carried out in medium devoid of extracellular calcium (containing EGTA), the Me ester (tested in DMSO or ethanol) effected the same rapid initial phase of intracellular calcium rise but the peak response quickly returned to baseline (Fig. 1 C, upper trace), suggesting that the second (longer) phase of the normal HxA3  response was due to the entry of extracellular calcium. Similar results were observed with the FA of HxA3  (Fig. 1 C, lower trace). Again the Me ester is slightly more potent than the FA (Me, 189±12 S.D.; FA, 145±6 S.D. nM, P <0.005, n =3). Similar results to the extracellular calcium-free experiments were observed when lanthanum chloride was added to the cells prior to HxA3  (data not shown). In order to investigate further whether the calcium releasing action of HxA3  on neutrophils was mediated via its conversion into other compounds, we incubated tritiated HxA3  Me ester with human neutrophils and analyzed the products after 1 and 5 min incubation, the periods of maximal change in intracellular calcium. The ethyl acetate extract of the incubation was analyzed by TLC. Fig. 2   shows that within a 1 min incubation (the period of sharp initial calcium rise) the Me ester is only partially hydrolyzed (about 10%) into the FA by intracellular esterases, demonstrating that the Me ester penetrates into the cell where it acts to release calcium from calcium stores (rapid initial phase). About 50% of the Me ester is converted into the FA as the sole metabolite within 5 min of incubation. Hence, the rapid initial phase of the calcium profile of the Me ester of HxA3  is due to a large part to the Me ester form itself while the prolonged phase occurs during and subsequent to the formation of the FA. The important experiment in Fig. 1 C (bottom trace) demonstrates that the FA is also active on intracellular stores to cause the release of intracellular calcium, i.e. it has dual actions. These experiments demonstrate that HxA3 , both as the FA as well as the Me ester, are taken up into the cell and act to release calcium from intracellular stores. Within the time frame of initial action (rapid phase, 1 min), studies with tritiated HxA3  show that the Me ester is not substantially hydrolyzed into the FA, although this takes place subsequently and is likely involved in calcium influx. Supporting this is the finding that the second phase of calcium response is equally pronounced when the FA is used (Fig. 1 B) and is absent in calcium-free medium (Fig. 1 C). Finally, caution should be exerted in the choice of vehicle as we show that DMSO interacts with the FA form of HxA3  (likely through formation of a polar hydrogen-bonded DMSO-HxA3  adduct [10] ) making the adduct incapable of entering the cell and rendering HxA3  inactive. In ethanol as vehicle, the FA enters the cell where it is capable both of releasing calcium from intracellular stores (see Fig. 1 C) and causing influx of extracellular calcium (compare Fig. 1 B and C). Similar findings were observed with Hx binding studies. The FA dissolved in DMSO did not bind to intact neutrophils but did bind to membranes from disrupted cells, while the Me ester was equally well bound to the intact cell as well as disrupted cells [3] .   Acknowledgements This study was supported by a Grant (MT-4181) to CRP-A from the Medical Research Council of Canada and from FO/FUB to SN.   
