 Phosphorothioate oligonucleotides (S-oligos) are nucleic acid derivatives commonly used as antisense agents (Milligan et al., 1993 ). These compounds have the replacement of one of non-bridging oxygens by a sulfur in the phosphodiester backbone. While this modification increases nuclease resistance, it also affects helix stability as well as the charge distribution along the backbone (Iyengar et al., 1984 ; Frey and Sammons, 1985 ; Stein et al., 1988 ). In both in vitro and in vivo systems, S-oligos display potent antisense activities and are currently in clinical trials in human disease (Stein and Cheng, 1993 ; Wagner, 1994 , Wagner, 1995 ). Despite their effectiveness in blocking gene expression, S-oligos have properties that could affect their use in antisense therapy. These properties include non-specific binding to cellular proteins as well as powerful immunostimulatory activities (Pisetsky and Reich, 1993 , Pisetsky and Reich, 1994a ; Brown et al., 1994 ; Perez et al., 1994 ; Zhao et al., 1996 ).These activities include stimulation of lymphocyte proliferation as well as induction of cytokines, including IL-12, IFN-α/β and IL-6 (Krieg et al., 1995 ; Klinman et al., 1996 ;Lipford et al., 1997 ). While sequence dependent, these activities are not antisense effects. Rather, immunostimulation by S-oligos resembles that of bacterial DNA as well as synthetic phosphodiester oligonucleotides containing CpG motifs. These findings suggest that S-oligos exert immunological effects by mimicking foreign DNA in its signaling properties (Pisetsky, 1996a , Pisetsky, 1996b ). In the current study, we have evaluated further the immunological properties of S-oligos by testing their ability to bind to antibodies to DNA (anti-DNA) in the solid phase. These antibodies occur prominently in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), a prototypic autoimmune disease characterized by the expression of antibodies to components of the cell nucleus (Pisetsky, 1992 ). Anti-DNA antibodies from lupus patients as well as murine models differ in fine specificity. Some antibodies have preference for certain base sequences and have binding site interactions with exposed bases. Other antibodies bind to conserved determinants found commonly on all natural DNA, both single stranded (ss) and double stranded (ds), with much less dependence on base sequence (Stollar et al., 1986 ; Sano et al., 1989 ; Stollar, 1994 ; Eilat and Anderson, 1994 ; Herrmann et al., 1995 ; Swanson et al., 1996 ). To investigate the antigenicity of S-oligos, we have tested the reactivity of normal and SLE sera to phosphorothioate compounds up to 30 bases in length. In results presented herein, we show that anti-DNA antibodies in SLE sera bind phosphorothioate oligonucleotides in a solid phase immunoassay. In their reactivity, S-oligos were more potent than phosphodiester oligonucleotides of similar sequence, suggesting that backbone modifications enhance antigenicity. These findings extend the immunological effects of S-oligos to antibody binding and suggest the use for phosphorothioates as antigens in immunological testing.  2 Experimental 2.1 Materials and methods 2.1.1 Antigens Oligonucleotides, synthesized using cyanoethyl phosphoramidite chemistry, were purchased from Midland Certified Reagent Company (Midland, TX) and purified by gel filtration and ethanol precipitation. These compounds were dissolved in distilled water to a final concentration of 1 mg/ml and filter sterilized through a Millex GV filter (Millipore, Bedford MA) for storage at 4°C. Calf thymus (CT) DNA was purchased from the Sigma Chemical Co. (St Louis, MO) and further purified by extraction with phenol : chloroform and ethanol precipitation. To prepare ssDNA antigen, the DNA was boiled for 10 min and then rapidly cooled in ice. Concentrations were determinated by absorbance at 260 nm with OD 260/280 ratios greater than 1.8 for preparations used. 2.1.1.1 Sera Sera from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus were obtained from the Clinical Immunology Laboratory of the Duke University Medical Center and were selected on the basis of a high level of anti-DNA in an ELISA for dsDNA (Sanofi Diagnostics Pasteur, Redmond, WA). Sera from normal human subjects (NHS) were obtained from healthy volunteers at the Durham VA Hospital.  2.1.1.2 ELISA For antibody assays, 96 well microtiter plates (Dynatech Laboratories, Chantilly, VA) were coated overnight at 4°C with DNA or oligonucleotides diluted to various concentrations in SSC (0.15 M NaCl, 0.1 M Na citrate pH 8.0). Plates were then washed 3 times with phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.3) containing 0.05% Tween 20 (Sigma) (PBS-T). Sera starting at 1 : 100 dilution were serially diluted in PBS-T containing 1% bovine serum albumin (Sigma) and then incubated on plates for 1 h at room temperature. After washing plates 3 times with PBS-T, peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-human IgG (gamma chain specific, Sigma) diluted 1 : 1000 in PBS-T was then added to the wells and incubated for 1 h. Plates were then washed 3 times with PBS-T and substrate solution containing 0.015% 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (Sigma), 0.01% hydrogen peroxide in 0.1 M sodium citrate buffer. pH 4 was added. After a 30 min incubation at room temperature, optical densities were determined at 380 nm using a Titertek plate reader (Flow Laboratories, McLean, VA). For competition experiments, sera were initially titrated to determine the concentration producing an OD 380 value of approximately 1 when uninhibited. This dilution of serum was then mixed with competing oligonucleotides or DNA antigen and incubated for 1 h prior to transfer to plates. The ELISA was then performed as described.    2.2 Results As a model to investigate the antigenicity of phosphorothioate oligonucleotides, we initially studied the compound 1082 which has a sequence complementary to a translation initiation codon region within the UL13 open reading frame of the herpes simplex virus (Table 1  ). This compound is 21 bases long and has been previously used to assess the immunostimulatory activity of phosphorothioates (Pisetsky and Reich, 1994a ). As shown in Fig. 1  , this compound shows reactivity with a lupus serum when coated to microtiter plates under the same conditions as CT ssDNA. Optimal antigenic activity was observed with oligonucleotide concentrations of 1–5 μg/ml, a value similar to that of CT ssDNA. Under these conditions, the NHS showed no appreciable reactivity, indicating specificity for antibodies in the SLE serum. A panel of SLE sera was next tested for reactivity to plates coated with S-oligo 1082 at a concentration of 5 μg/ml. Of 12 SLE with high levels of anti-DNA binding (OD380 greater than 2.0 at a dilution of 1 : 100), all but three produced ELISA values greater than 1.0 using 1082 as the coating antigen. Fig. 2   shows representative data of these titrations. These results suggest that binding to S-oligos is a property of some but not all anti-DNA antibodies. To demonstrate further that binding to S-oligos is a property of anti-DNA antibodies, inhibition ELISA were performed using sera that bound both CT ssDNA and 1082. As shown in Fig. 3  , soluble S-oligo effectively competed for binding to surface bound CT ssDNA. Conversely, CT ssDNA effectively competed for binding to 1082 (Fig. 4  ). These results indicate that the free oligonucleotide is antigenic and provide further evidence that S-oligo reactivity reflects anti-DNA binding. The relationship of sequence to antigenicity was next assessed by comparing antibody binding by two SLE sera and an NHS serum to a group of S-oligos (Table 1 ). As shown in Table 2  , all compounds tested were active in the direct binding ELISA, although the sera varied somewhat in their binding to these compounds; the NHS serum, however, showed binding minimally above background. These results suggest that an important determinant of antigenicity is the phosphorothioate backbone but do not exclude sequence-specific binding. The specificity for backbone determinants was evaluated further by comparing reactivity of phosphorothioate and phosphodiester compounds 20 bases long synthesized with all four bases at each position to provide a large set of varying sequences (randomers). Like S-oligos of other sequences, the S-oligo randomer was active when bound to polystyrene plates. Under the same coating and assay conditions, however, the phosphodiester compound was much less active (Fig. 5  ). These findings suggest the importance of the phosphorothioate backbone to antigenicity. This point was further demonstrated by comparing the activity of the phosphorothioate randomer with the phosphodiester randomer as fluid phase inhibitors. Consistent with direct binding results, the phosphorothioate was a much better inhibitor than the phosphodiester. Thus, at a concentration of 50 μg/ml, the phosphorothioate randomer inhibited binding in the ELISA 67±12% compared to 17±11% for the phosphodiester (mean±S.D. for four SLE sera). In these experiments, the oligonucleotides were all at least 18 bases in length. To evaluate whether shorter compounds are also antigenic, the activity of a random sequence 10-mer was tested. As shown in Fig. 6  , this compound showed only weak antigenicity with only two of four sera tested producing on OD380 value in the ELISA greater than 0.5. These results suggest that a sequence somewhere between 10 and 20 bases in length is required for antigenicity and that shorter compounds either fail to adhere to plates or present an antigenic epitope.  2.3 Discussion Results of these studies demonstrate that anti-DNA antibodies in SLE sera can bind solid phase phosphorothioate oligonucleotides in an interaction influenced by the backbone modification. The identity of these antibodies as anti-DNA is established by both direct binding as well as inhibition assays. Thus, soluble CT ssDNA can block antibody binding to solid phase S-oligos while S-oligos can block antibody binding to CT ssDNA. The binding of murine monoclonal anti-DNA antibodies to phosphorothoiate DNA has been previously described, although these antibodies were induced by immunization with modified DNA (Latimer et al., 1995 ). Our data provide the first demonstration that spontaneous anti-DNA antibodies in human SLE sera display such reactivity. The binding of lupus sera to S-oligos is notable in view of studies on the influence of DNA size on antigenicity (Papalian et al., 1980 ; Ali et al., 1985 ). Although an antibody binding site can accommodate three to four bases, most SLE sera fail to bind to short oligonucleotides and rather require DNA pieces at least 35–45 bases in length in fluid phase assays. These findings suggest that lupus anti-DNA bind to DNA by bivalent or monogamous interaction. In this mode of binding, both Fab combining sites contact antigenic determinants along the same continuous stretch of DNA. Because of the distance between antibody combining sites (greater than 100Å depending on the angle at the hinge region), the minimum size piece of DNA to span this distance is approximately 35–45 bases in length. The requirement for bivalent interaction suggests that the affinity of each Fab combining site is relatively low and insufficient for monovalent binding. The model for bivalent binding is based on studies of fluid phase assays. A recent study assessing anti-DNA binding by ELISA suggested that solid phase interactions impose more drastic requirements for DNA antigenicity (Pisetsky and Reich, 1994b ). Thus, ssDNA pieces less than 2000 bases showed poor antigenicity when adhered to plastic surfaces, although these fragments were nevertheless active in the fluid phase. These results suggest that solid phase binding may limit antibody-antigen interactions because of structural constraints imposed on low molecular weight DNA (1000–2000 bases or less) by surface adherence. The surface adherence of DNA in this size range may involve the majority of the molecule; under these conditions, antigenicity may be impaired because extensive surface binding limits the exposure of certain determinants or prevents conformational rearrangements (e.g., DNA looping) required for antibody binding. In contrast, high molecular DNA may have greater regions that are free in solution and capable of rearranging for bivalent binding. In contrast to phosphodiester oligonucleotides, phosphorothioate oligonucleotides were antigenically active in solid phase form. The results with the ELISA are particularly striking since, as described above, SLE sera fail to bind appreciably to natural DNA fragments much greater in length or, as shown herein, phosphodiester oligonucleotides of the same sequence. These results suggest that lupus anti-DNA bind much more avidly to phosphorothioates than phosphodiester compounds and, as a result, interact with oligonucleotides in solid phase assays. As shown with phosphorothioates in a number of systems, the presence of phosphorothioate linkages increases non-specific protein binding (Brown et al., 1994 ; Guvakova et al., 1995 ; Shoeman et al., 1997 ). In the case of antibodies, however, binding to phosphorothioates appears to be a specific property of anti-DNA antibodies. Thus, normal sera showed low reactivity with phosphorothioate-coated plates under conditions in which SLE sera bound well in a fashion inhibited by soluble DNA. Enhanced antigenicity of phosphorothioates could relate to the distribution of charge along the backbone since charge–charge interactions are important for lupus anti-DNA. Alternatively, the presence of phosphorothioate groups may enhance binding by altering backbone geometry or flexibility as well as adherence to solid phase supports. Because of the stereochemistry of phosphorothioate bonds, the structure of these compounds has been difficult to determine precisely. Using current synthetic methods, these compounds have chiral centers since the sulfur atom can occur in either of two orientations (R or S) with respect to the phosphate backbone (Milligan et al., 1993 ; Frey and Sammons, 1985 ). As a result, S-oligo preparations contain an enormous mixture of stereoisomers, reflecting the occurrence of either isomeric form at every bond position. This complexity, which precludes structural analysis by usual biophysical techniques, also prevents determination of whether enhanced antigenicity characterizes all phosphorothioates or only certain steroisomers. In this regard, we have not as yet tested double stranded oligomers to assess their behavior in these assays; most SLE anti-DNA, however, crossreact with ss and dsDNA. These findings have implications both for the assessment of anti-DNA antibodies as well as the medicinal use of phosphorothioate oligonucleotides. Thus, phosphorothioate oligonucleotides could provide the basis for assays of anti-DNA antibodies (at least to ssDNA) using short compounds synthesized with defined sequence. The application of synthetic compounds should obviate variations in assays resulting from the use of DNA from various species and possible interference from contaminating non-nucleic acid components (Stollar et al., 1962 ; Casperson and Voss, 1983 ). The nuclease resistance of phosphorothioates may also improve stability of antigens in sera and performance characteristics of assays. As shown previously, phosphorothioates have immunostimulatory properties that reflect features of the backbone (Pisetsky and Reich, 1993 ; Pisetsky and Reich, 1994a ; Zhao et al., 1996 ). The ability of these compounds to bind anti-DNA suggests that may also have immunogenic potential and promote anti-DNA production in susceptible individuals. This potential, which could reflect their adjuvant properties, nuclease resistance as well as interactions with surface Ig receptors, could limit the use of phosphorothioates in the setting of inflammatory or autoimmune disease (Braun and Lee, 1988 ). On the other hand, an S-oligo that bound anti-DNA without exerting immunostimulatory effects could block the pathogenic effects of anti-DNA. Studies are therefore in progress to define further the immunological effects of phosphorothioates binding to antibodies and structural basis for antibody interaction.     
