 Free d -amino acids have been shown to be present in a large variety of species, including mammals and, more specifically, humans [1,2] . In particular, d -aspartate has drawn special interest since (a) its levels are often found to be the highest amongst d -amino acids [3] , (b) recent reports propose some yet unknown neuronal and neuroendocrine roles of d -aspartate [4,5] , (c) high levels of d -aspartate in the brain and other tissues of mammals were discovered by several authors [6–8] , (d) abnormal levels of d -aspartate have been reported in relation to Alzheimer, senescence and renal diseases [9,10] , (e) various levels of d -amino acids are produced during food processing [11] , (f) d -aspartate and other chemically related molecules (such as N -methyl-d -aspartate) are widely used as agonists or antagonists of neurochemical transmitters both in in vivo and in vitro studies and (h) some of them might play such a role also in vivo [4,12,13] . Despite the growing interest in the biological functions of d -aspartate, little is known about its origin and metabolism in mammals. In this regard, a flavoprotein with d -aspartate oxidase activity has been purified, characterized and cloned from beef kidney cortex [14–17]  and, more recently, from human brain [18] . The enzyme from beef kidney cortex (bDASPO) has been thoroughly investigated as far as primary structure, kinetic mechanism, FAD binding and spectroscopic properties of the free and ligand-bound enzyme are concerned [14–16] . It is a monomer with a molecular weight of 37 659 (apo-protein) containing one molecule of flavin. It is isolated as a mixture of an active form containing FAD (FAD-bDASPO) and an inactive form (9–20% depending on the purification) containing 6-OH-FAD (6-OH-FAD-bDASPO). The enzyme catalyzes the oxidative deamination of dicarboxylic d -amino acids by O2  with the production of H2 O2 , NH3  and the corresponding α-keto acids. The relatively low abundance of the enzyme, and the consequently long purification procedure, hampered so far the use of this protein as a tool to study the presence and biological significance of dicarboxylic d -amino acids in organisms. In order to overcome this problem, a procedure to overexpress recombinant d -aspartate oxidase (rDASPO) in Escherichia coli  has been set up [17] . Starting from the latter study, the present paper reports overexpression and purification protocols leading to large amounts of homogeneous and catalytically active rDASPO. The biochemical characterization of the recombinant enzyme shows that rDASPO possesses the same catalytic properties of bDASPO and, therefore, can be used to extend the study of the properties of DASPO. In particular, in this paper we focused our attention on the determination of the redox potential of DASPO and to possible interactions between the enzyme and a variety of molecules used as agonists or antagonists of neurotransmitters [12] .  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Overexpression and purification of rDASPO E. coli  GI724 cells, carrying the cI  repressor gene engineered into bacterial chromosome under the control of the Trp  promoter, were freshly transformed with the recombinant plasmid pED carrying the gene for bovine kidney d -aspartate oxidase under the control of the λ PL  promoter [17] . 200 ml RM medium (6 g Na2 HPO4 , 3 g KH2 PO4 , 0.5 g NaCl, 1 g NH4 Cl, 95.21 mg MgCl2 , 20 g casamino acids, 10 ml glycerol in 1 l) containing 100 μg ampicillin ml−1  were inoculated with 20 ml overnight precultures of GI724 (pED) and the cells grown at 30°C up to A 550  0.5. The material was used to inoculate 6 l of induction medium (6 g Na2 HPO4 , 3 g KH2 PO4 , 0.5 g NaCl, 1 g NH4 Cl, 95.21 mg MgCl2 , 2 g casamino acids, 5 g glucose for 1 l) containing 100 μg ampicillin ml−1  in a fermenter (BioIndustrie Mantovane, Italy) and the cells grown at 30°C until A 550  reached 0.5. Expression was induced by adding tryptophan to a final concentration of 100 μg ml−1  and raising the temperature to 37°C. The cells were harvested after 16 h, centrifuged at 14 000×g  for 25 min, resuspended in cold 0.9% NaCl, centrifuged at 27 000×g  and the pellet stored at −80°C. All purification steps were performed at 4°C and all buffers contained 0.3 mM EDTA and 5 mM sodium potassium tartrate, unless otherwise indicated. Cells were resuspended in 2 vols. of 50 mM NaPi, pH 8.0, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 20 μM FAD, sonicated and centrifuged at 27 000×g  for 30 min. Protamine sulfate was slowly added to a final concentration of 0.2% at 0°C, the material was left at the same temperature for an additional 15 min and then centrifuged at 27 000×g  for 1 h. The supernatant was adjusted to 0. 15 M NaPi, pH 6.75 and loaded on a Phenyl-Sepharose CL-4B column (13×2.6 cm) equilibrated in the same buffer. The column was washed with 2 vols. of starting buffer and the enzyme eluted with 10 mM NaPi, pH 8.0. The active fractions (total volume about 2.5 l) were brought to 20 μM FAD, 50 mM MES pH 5.5 using a concentrated solution of this buffer, divided in 300 ml aliquots and directly loaded on a S15 strong cationic exchanger membrane adsorber (Sartorius AG, Germany) equilibrated in 50 mM MES, pH 5.5. The membrane was washed with 10 ml of the starting buffer and eluted with the same buffer containing 1 M NaCl in 2 ml fractions. The active fractions were pooled and equilibrated in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 5 mM sodium potassium tartrate, 0.3 mM EDTA, 20 μM FAD using an Amicon-PM 10 membrane. The pure enzyme was stored under these conditions at −80°C. If necessary, excess FAD and tartrate were removed prior to experiments by gel filtration on a PD-10 column (Pharmacia) equilibrated either in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 or in 0.1 M KPi, pH 7.0. In conclusion, the recombinant protein was purified following a new procedure greatly simplified as compared to the one used for the enzyme from beef kidney cortex [14] , omitting the heat, gel filtration and Mono Q ion-exchange steps and performing the final ion-exchange step on a S15 strong cationic exchanger membrane adsorber instead of the original Mono S column. The latter modification has the main advantages of avoiding time consuming concentration and equilibration steps and exposure of the enzyme to room temperature during FPLC chromatography.  2.2 Activity assay The oxidase activity was determined by the spectrophotometric method set up in [14]  which couples the production of hydrogen peroxide in the DASPO-catalyzed reaction with the oxidation of o -dianisidine by horseradish peroxidase (ϵ436 =11 610 M−1  cm−1 ). The reaction mixture contained 90 μg o -dianisidine-2 HCl, 20 nmol FAD, 64 μg horseradish peroxidase and variable amounts of substrate (routinely 10 mM d -aspartate) in 1 ml of 50 mM KPi, pH 7.4, at 25°C. The reaction was started by addition of variable amounts of rDASPO (20 ng–4 μg) depending on the substrate tested. 1 U of enzyme is defined as the amount which oxidizes 1 μmol substrate min−1 . When a compound was not used as substrate by rDASPO it was tested as an inhibitor by determining its effect on the rate of oxidation of d -aspartate (using 10 mM of both substrate and inhibitor).  2.3 Protein content Protein content during the purification steps was estimated using an extinction coefficient of 1 for a 1 mg ml −1  protein solution. The purified enzyme was quantitated using the extinction coefficients previously determined for the various enzyme forms: ϵ454 =11 810 M−1  cm−1  for holo-FAD-bDASPO and ϵ458 =12 300 M−1  cm−1  for l -(+)-tartrate-bDASPO complex [14] .  2.4 Apo-enzyme preparation Apo-rDASPO was prepared according to the procedure for the selective removal of FAD from bDASPO described in [14] . Briefly, 2 mg holo-enzyme were dialyzed at 4°C for 3 days against 500 ml of 0.1 M KPi, pH 7.0, 0.3 mM EDTA containing 3 M KBr and 0.5% charcoal, followed by 24 h dialysis against 2 l of the same buffer without KBr and charcoal.  2.5 Anaerobic reduction of d -aspartate oxidase Anaerobic reduction of rDASPO was conducted at 25°C in 0.1 M KPi, pH 7.0 either in the absence or presence of 4 mM l -(+)-tartrate. Anaerobiosis was achieved by alternate evacuation and flushing with argon freed from any residual oxygen using High Capacity Gas Purifier and OMI Indicating Purifier devices (Supelco, USA). Photoreduction was achieved by irradiating the protein with a slide projector at 0°C in the presence of 10 mM EDTA, 0.5 μM 5-deazaflavin-3-sulfonate as catalyst and 5 μM benzylviologen [19] . Following each irradiation, measurements were started when spectral changes in the dark were complete (5–15 min at 25°C). Alternatively, rDASPO was reduced by mixing the enzyme (2 ml) in the main compartment of an anaerobic cuvette with 10 mU of xanthine oxidase [20] . After anaerobiosis, xanthine and benzylviologen were added from a side arm to a final concentration of 250 μM and 5 μM, respectively, to start the reaction. The concentrations of oxidized, semiquinone and reduced enzyme at each point of the reduction were calculated from the total enzyme present and from the absorbance at suitable wavelengths (454 and 374 nm for the free enzyme and 458 and 374 nm for the l -(+)-tartrate complex) using the following equation:(1) ΔA(ox −x)=[red](ϵox −ϵred )+[sq](ϵox −ϵsq )    were ΔA  (ox−x ) is the decrease in absorbance in comparison to the spectrum of the oxidized enzyme, ϵox , ϵsq  and ϵred  are the extinction coefficients for oxidized, semiquinone and reduced form of the enzyme and [red] and [sq] are the molar concentrations of reduced and semiquinone rDASPO, respectively. In order to determine the amount of semiquinone thermodynamically stabilized, 7.7 μM rDASPO in 0.1 M KPi, pH 7.0, 0.5 μM 5-deazaflavin-3-sulfonate, 10 mM EDTA and 5 μM benzylviologen was completely photoreduced anaerobically as described above and mixed with an equimolar amount of concentrated oxidized enzyme previously stored in the side arm of the cell. The reaction was followed at 25°C in the dark until no further absorbance changes could be detected (24 h) and the amount of oxidized, semiquinone and reduced enzyme at equilibrium was calculated as described above.  2.6 Determination of redox potentials The redox potential of rDASPO was determined by a spectrophotometric method employing a reducing system of xanthine, xanthine oxidase and a suitable mediator such as benzylviologen [20] . Data were plotted according to [21] . The amount of oxidized and reduced indicator dye and enzyme was calculated from the experimentally determined extinction coefficients and isosbestic points at the following wavelengths, depending on the experiment: (a) ITS (600 nm)+rDASPO (486 nm, isosbestic for ITS); (b) IDS (610 nm)+rDASPO (374 and 458 nm, the latter being an isosbestic for IDS); (c) IDS (610 nm)+l -(+)-tartrate-rDASPO (458 nm); (d) HNQ (458 nm)+l -(+)-tartrate-rDASPO (364 nm).  2.7 Miscellaneous methods Absorption spectra were measured with a Hewlett Packard HP8452 diode-array spectrophotometer. Fluorescence spectra were recorded on a Jasco (Japan Spectroscopy, Japan) FP 750 spectrofluorimeter. SDS-PAGE was performed according to [22] . N-Terminal amino acid sequence was determined using an Applied BioSystems (Foster City, USA) model 477/A automatic protein sequencer. Commercial FAD was purified by HPLC as reported in [14] .  2.8 Materials Xanthine oxidase was purchased from Sigma. bDASPO was purified from beef kidney cortex as described in [14] . 5-Deazaflavin-3-sulfonate was a generous gift of V. Massey (University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA). All the other chemicals were of the highest purity commercially available.   3 Results 3.1 Comparison between the properties of rDASPO and bDASPO Table 1   summarizes the purification protocol of rDASPO starting from 38 g of wet E. coli  paste. Since rDASPO is homogeneous as far as the coenzyme content is concerned (FAD, see below), while bDASPO is purified as a mixture of an active FAD-containing and an inactive 6-OH-FAD-containing form, the specific activity of rDASPO (29.1 U mg−1 ) is slightly higher than that of bDASPO (25.3 U mg−1 [14] ). As shown in Fig. 1  , the molecular mass of rDASPO is 38 kDa, in agreement with that of bDASPO. The amino acid sequence of the 20 N-terminal residues of purified rDASPO is identical to the one expected from the sequence of bDASPO. It should be pointed out that the N-terminal Met residue in rDASPO is free and not blocked as it is in bDASPO [16] . The visible absorption spectra of rDASPO and bDASPO at the end of the respective purification procedures are clearly different, since the former lacks both the long wavelength absorption (centered around 610 nm) and the pronounced shoulders around 440, 360 and 340 nm typically observed with bDASPO (Fig. 2   in this paper and Fig. 1 of [14] ). As reported in [14] , such absorption features are due to the presence of variable amounts of 6-OH-FAD in bDASPO. In accordance, the visible absorption spectrum of rDASPO resembles that of apo-bDASPO reconstituted with FAD (see Fig. 6 of [14] ), although the latter showed higher absorbance below 400 nm, probably a consequence of the harsh conditions used to obtain the complete apo-protein [14] . In order to confirm the absence of 6-OH-FAD from preparations of rDASPO, the coenzyme was removed under conditions which allowed the selective removal of FAD (but not of 6-OH-FAD) from bDASPO [14] . As expected, no visible absorption was present after removal of FAD (not shown). The absence of the 6-OH-FAD form in rDASPO strengthens the hypothesis that such a form has no biological significance and is an artifact of the long lasting purification procedure of the enzyme from the natural source. As it was the case for FAD-bDASPO, rDASPO shows flavin fluorescence. Binding of apo-rDASPO to FAD quenches its fluorescence to a final 86% intensity, a value only slightly higher than the one observed for FAD-bDASPO (70% [14] ). Titration of rDASPO with l -(+)-tartrate (Fig. 2 ) and sulfite [23]  (data not shown), two ligands whose complexes with FAD-bDASPO have been thoroughly characterized, further confirmed that the recombinant protein shares the same properties as the FAD-containing form of the enzyme from the natural source. In fact, the dissociation constants determined for the complexes between rDASPO and l -(+)-tartrate or sulfite (4.10×10−5  M and 7.5×10−6  M, respectively) are very similar to those determined in the case of FAD-bDASPO (2.65×10−5  M and 7.4×10 −6  M, respectively [14] ).  3.2 Apo-protein preparation and holo-enzyme reconstitution As reported above, the mild conditions used to remove FAD from rDASPO produced a complete apo-protein with no residual visible absorption and activity. Reconstitution of holo-enzyme by addition of FAD resulted in a species with a specific activity of 90% as compared to rDASPO, with a yield of 53%. Such a value is significantly higher than the one obtained in the case of bDASPO (24%), due to the harsher conditions necessary to remove 6-OH-FAD from bDASPO [14] .  3.3 Redox potential of rDASPO In order to determine the redox potential of the enzyme by the spectrophotometric method described by Massey [20]  it was first necessary to determine the extinction coefficients of the oxidized (EFAD), one-electron reduced (semiquinone, EFAD−⋅ ) and two-electron reduced rDASPO (EFADH− ) both free and in complex with l -(+)-tartrate. Fig. 3   shows the reduction of free rDASPO using the xanthine/xanthine oxidase reducing system. Almost quantitative formation of red anionic semiquinone (91%) was observed in the first part of the experiment, followed by complete reduction of the enzyme. Extinction coefficients at any wavelength could be obtained for the oxidized and fully reduced form from the initial and the final spectrum, respectively, and for the semiquinone by means of plots such as that shown in the inset of Fig. 3 . It should be pointed out that when the enzyme was photoreduced, under the same experimental conditions, a much lower amount of semiquinone was detected (about 26% at maximum formation, data not shown). The significant difference in the percentage of semiquinone observed during the experiments using different reduction systems suggests that the stabilization of the radical was at least in part kinetic rather than thermodynamic. This was experimentally proved (for the free enzyme) by mixing equimolar amounts of EFADH−  and EFAD in the presence of benzylviologen as mediator and allowing the system to reach complete equilibrium; 32% of red semiquinone was observed after 24 h. This value corresponds to a semiquinone formation constant K  of 0.89, where [24,25] (2) K={2[semiquinonemax  ]/(1−[semiquinonemax  ])}2     From the relation [24] (3) (E2 °′−E1 °′)=−(RT/F) ln   K   it can be predicted that for the free enzyme E 2 °′ (EFAD−⋅ /EFADH− ) is 3 mV more positive than E 1 °′ (EFAD/EFAD−⋅ ). When the reduction was performed in the presence of 4 mM l -(+)-tartrate a maximum amount of 83% and 46% was observed using the xanthine/xanthine oxidase or the EDTA/light reduction method, respectively. Again, extinction coefficients for oxidized, one-electron and two-electron reduced l -(+)-tartrate-rDASPO were calculated from the experiment using xanthine/xanthine oxidase (data not shown). Table 2   shows the experimentally determined redox potential of rDASPO and l -(+)-tartrate-rDASPO complex in 0.1 M KPi, pH 7.0, 25°C. The redox potential of the free enzyme was determined using ITS and IDS as indicator dyes. In the case of ITS (Fig. 4  ) no semiquinone formation was detected and a midpoint potential of −97 mV (slope=1.1) was calculated from the Minnaert plot shown in inset of Fig. 4 . On the contrary, using IDS a significant amount of semiquinone (up to 58%) was detected. This allowed to calculate the redox potentials for each electron using data from the first part of the experiment for E 1 °′ (−96 mV, slope=1.9) and from the second part of the reaction for E 2 °′ (−95 mV, slope=2.0) (Fig. 5 and Table 2   ). The calculated E m °′ (−95.5 mV) agrees well with the midpoint potential determined with ITS, as does the difference between E 2 °′ and E 1 °′ (determined +1 mV, predicted from the semiquinone formation constant +3 mV). From the shift in the midpoint potential of FAD (−207 mV, Massey) upon binding to rDASPO (−97 mV) and the known dissociation constant of FAD for the oxidized protein (5×10−8  M [14] ) a value of 1.0×10−11  M for K red  (the dissociation constant of the reduced coenzyme) can be calculated using the following equation [24] :(4) ΔE°′=RT/nF×ln  (Kox  /Kred  )    In the presence of 4 mM l -(+)-tartrate, a concentration 100-fold higher than the dissociation constant of the ligand for the oxidized enzyme, a midpoint potential of −157 (slope=1.1) and −156 mV (slope=1.1) was determined for the l -(+)-tartrate-rDASPO complex using IDS and HNQ (Table 2 and Fig. 6  ) as indicator dyes, respectively. No detectable formation of semiquinone was observed. Eq. 5 [26]  allows to calculate the dissociation constant of l -(+)-tartrate for reduced rDASPO (K red ′=3.6×10−2  M):(5) ΔE°′=RT/nF×ln  {(1+[L ]/Kred  ′)/(1+[L ]/Kox  ′)}   where ΔE °′ is the difference between the redox potential in the presence and in the absence of the ligand, K red ′ is the dissociation constant of l -(+)-tartrate from reduced rDASPO and K ox ′ is the known dissociation constant for the same ligand from the oxidized enzyme (K ox ′, 4.1×10−5  M, see above), and [L] the concentration of l -(+)-tartrate used. It can be concluded that l -(+)-tartrate binds also to EFADH− , although with a much lower affinity as compared to EFAD. This result confirms those obtained for another ligand (oxaloacetate) and for the substrate (d -aspartate), based on kinetic data [15] .  3.4 Oxidase activity towards neurotransmitter agonists DASPO is strictly specific for d -amino acids since l -amino acids do not act as substrates or inhibitors. However, it is not strictly specific for d -aspartate, being active also against a variety of other d -amino acids, with a strong preference for dicarboxylic ones [27,28] . The availability of large amounts of pure active enzyme allows to extend the characterization of the substrate specificity of DASPO to a series of other d -amino acids which are known to possess pharmacological activity as neurotransmitter agonists [12] . The apparent kinetic parameters have been obtained under conditions in which DASPO was shown to follow Michaelis-Menten kinetics with d -aspartate (from 2 mM to 30 mM [15] ). Linear double reciprocal plots were obtained for all substrates in this range. The results obtained are listed in Table 3  . It should be pointed out that many of the compounds listed are indeed oxidized at a significant rate by DASPO. Analysis of the data of Table 3  suggests that the compounds can be divided into three groups: the first comprises those which do not seem to interact with DASPO, since they are neither substrates nor inhibitors; the second contains d -aspartate and N -methyl-d -aspartate, which are by far the best substrates; the third comprises the remaining substrates, which are oxidized at similar rates (apparent turnover number ranging between 0.22 and 2.2 s−1 ). As regards the latter group, the results suggest that substitution of a sulfonic (d,l -cysteic acid) or phosphonic (d,l -2-amino-3-phosphonopropanoic acid) group for the β-carboxylic group of d -aspartate causes a dramatic decrease in the turnover number. The presence of a second acidic group, however, is not an absolute requirement, since d -aspartate-β-hydroxamate is a substrate. In accordance, d -proline was shown to be a substrate for bDASPO (apparent turnover number 0.4 s−1 , K m  9×10−4  M [28] ) and d -asparagine and d -glutamine for DASPO from Octopus  but not for bDASPO [28] . An increase in the length of the carbon chain also causes a drop in the oxidation rate, as observed with d -glutamate, d -homocysteic acid and, more dramatically, with d,l -2-amino-4-phosphonobutanoic acid, which is neither a substrate nor an inhibitor. A further decrease in the rate of oxidation is observed with the C6-dicarboxylic compound d -α-aminoadipic acid. As expected from previous studies on a related compound (2,3-diaminosuccinic acid [29] ), threo -β-hydroxy-d -aspartate does not interact with DASPO either as a substrate or an inhibitor. The oxidative activity of DASPO towards glycyl-d -aspartate is of particular relevance since this compound has been proposed to be involved in synaptic transmission in prefrontal cortex in vivo [13] .   4 Discussion 4.1 Purification and properties of rDASPO This paper reports overexpression and purification conditions leading to about 2 mg pure rDASPO each g of wet E. coli  paste. rDASPO has been shown to possess the same general biochemical properties of bDASPO, except that the former contains only FAD, while the latter is a mixture of two forms, an active one containing FAD and an inactive one containing 6-OH-FAD (9–20% depending on the preparation) [14] . For such reason, apart from the amount of enzyme obtained and the ease and quickness of the purification protocol, the procedure reported has the following advantages over the one previously used to obtain bDASPO from the natural source (beef kidney cortex): rDASPO possesses a specific activity higher than bDASPO, apo-protein preparation requires milder conditions, resulting in a higher yield of reconstitutable holo-enzyme, and spectroscopic studies are facilitated by the absence of a second compound with visible absorption properties which partially overlap those of FAD. The latter feature has been used to determine the redox potential of the enzyme by the spectrophotometric method set up by Massey [20] .  4.2 Redox potentials of DASPO The midpoint potential of DASPO in 0.1 M KPi, pH 7.0, 25°C is −97 mV. Thus, the binding to the apo-enzyme increases the redox potential of the flavin by 110 mV as compared to free FAD, a shift which is consistent with the role of the enzyme as a dehydrogenase/oxidase. Useful comparisons can be made with the redox properties of the closely related well known enzyme d -amino acid oxidase, which catalyzes the same reaction catalyzed by DASPO but with different substrate specificity, being active only towards neutral and basic d -amino acids [30] . The general properties of the two enzymes have been shown to be similar, although their kinetic mechanism is slightly different [15,30] . Van den Berghe and Stankovich determined E 1 °′ of –98 mV and E 2 °′ of 117 mV in 50 mM KPi, pH 7.0, 18°C for d -amino acid oxidase [31] . Thus, the calculated midpoint potential and the amount of semiquinone stabilized (–108 mV and 40%, respectively) are only slightly different from the ones determined for DASPO (–97 mV and 32%). In accordance, the presence of a specific inhibitor causes similar negative shifts in the redox potential of the two enzymes (39 mV in the case of d -amino acid oxidase with benzoate, 58 mV for DASPO in the presence of l -(+)-tartrate). In conclusion, the redox properties of DASPO conform to those expected for a typical flavoprotein oxidase [32] . This is in marked contrast with what has been observed for E. coli l -aspartate oxidase, a flavoenzyme which catalyzes the oxidation of l -aspartate by O2  and cannot use d -aspartate as a substrate, whose redox potential (–216 mV) is actually lower than that of free FAD [33] . Thus, the redox potential data confirm other experimental evidence which suggests that, although DASPO and l -aspartate oxidase catalyze the same reaction but with different enantio-specificity, their properties are largely different [33–35] . This fact can be ascribed both to the need to assure absolute stereospecificity and to respond to totally different metabolic demands and controls. In fact, the biological role of DASPO is likely to be mainly catabolic [36] , while that of l -aspartate oxidase is exclusively anabolic, since it catalyzes the first step in the de novo biosynthesis of pyridinic nucleotides in several microorganisms and plants [37] .  4.3 Substrate specificity of DASPO The investigation of the interaction between DASPO and dicarboxylic compounds which are known to possess pharmacological activities as agonists/antagonists for excitatory amino acid receptors has allowed to identify two new substrates for the enzyme, i.e. d -aspartate-β-hydroxamate and glycyl-d -aspartate, and to determine the kinetic parameters for these and a number of other substrates. The results are of particular interest for two reasons: first of all, the presence of d -aspartate, d -glutamate, N -methyl-d -aspartate and glycyl-d -aspartate have been reported in several organisms [4–10,13,38] ; secondly, all of the compounds listed in Table 3  are used for both in vivo and in vitro studies as agonists/antagonists for excitatory amino acid receptors but the metabolic fate of most, if not all, of them is still unknown. Since DASPO has been shown to be present in a number of tissues, the possibility exists that the effect of such compounds can be influenced both in vivo and in vitro by the amount of DASPO present.    Acknowledgements We wish to thank Prof. Tatjana Simonic for providing E. coli  GI724 (pED) cells. This paper was supported by grants from the Ministero della Università e della Ricerca Scientifica and from the Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (Italy).   
