 In intermediary metabolism, lipoic acid (LA; 6,8-thioctic acid) serves as a prosthetic group covalently linked to a lysyl residue of three mitochondrial α-keto acid dehydrogenase complexes; namely, the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC), the α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, and the branched-chain α-keto acid dehydrogenase complex, and also to H protein of the glycine cleavage system [1,2] . These complexes are involved in the oxidation of carbohydrate and amino acids as well as in cellular oxidative metabolism [1] . Reoxidation of reduced lipoyl moieties of these four complexes is carried out by dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (E3), the common component of the complexes. Additionally, E3 recognizes free dihydrolipoamide as a substrate and also catalyzes the reverse reaction using lipoamide and NADH. LA itself is a poor substrate for the reverse reaction of E3 [3] . Due to its potent anti-oxidant properties in biological systems, LA has been used as a therapeutic agent against hepatic and neurological disorders. Clinically, decreased levels of endogenous LA were reported in patients with liver cirrhosis, diabetes mellitus, polyneuritis and atherosclerosis [4] . LA has been used in therapeutic treatments for the relief of symptoms of diabetic neuropathy and improvements in overall cellular metabolism, probably via the stimulatory effects on glucose uptake, utlization and disposal in various biological tissues [5–8] . LA is also used as a preventive agent for calcium oxalate stone formation in animals [9,10] . Even though the mechanisms of the actions of LA have not been elucidated, these therapeutic effects might be explained by the free-radical scavenging role of dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA), formed by intracellular reduction of LA [11] , since exogenous DHLA prevented oxidative damage to membranes, low density lipoproteins, and ischemia reperfusion injury of rat heart and brain [12,13] . Since R-LA is increasingly used as an antioxidant, it is of interest to evaluate its effects on pyruvate metabolism via PDC in the cell. Recently, 1,2-diselenolane-3-pentanoic acid (Se-LA, diseleno lipoic acid), a derivative of LA in which two sulfur atoms are substituted with selenium atoms, was also found to be an effective antioxidant. Although both LA and Se-LA have similar chemical structures except for the larger selenium atoms in the 1,2-dithiolane ring of Se-LA, they showed remarkably different anti-oxidant properties against various biological systems [S. Matsugo, L.-J. Yan, H. Ulrich, and L. Packer (unpublished work)]. In that study, Se-LA had no antioxidant effect on protein oxidative modification of human low density lipoprotein, but it showed a protective effect, similar to LA, against the formation of lipid peroxidation products. In earlier works, both enantiomers of lipoic acid (R- and S- forms) and lipoic acid homologues (RS-1,2-dithiolane-3-caproic acid, RS-bisnorlipoic acid and RS-tetranorlipoic acid) were studied for the substrate selectivity for E3 [14–17] . Furthermore, the effects of LA enantiomers and their analogs on the activities of PDC and its catalytic components from different sources have been investigated with variable findings [17] , and the possible effects of Se-LA on PDC have not been reported. In this paper, we report the effects of Se-LA, and both the R- and S- forms of LA, on the reactions catalyzed by mammalian PDC and its individual catalytic components as well as their effects on pyruvate oxidation by intact HepG2 cells.  Materials and methods Materials Porcine heart PDC and DL-lipoamide were purchased from Sigma Chemical Company (St. Louis, MO). R-LA, S-LA, and Se-LA were kindly provided by ASTA Medica AG, Frankfurt, Germany. DL-Dihydrolipoamide was chemically produced by the reduction of DL-lipoamide with NaBH4 [18] . [1-14 C]Acetyl-CoA and [1-14 C]pyruvate were from ICN Pharmaceutical Inc. (Costa Mesa, CA). Other chemicals were commercial grade.  Activity measurements of PDC and its catalytic components For the preparation of lipoic acid stock solutions, R-LA, S-LA, and Se-LA were dissolved to their desired concentrations (up to 200 mM) in 95% (v/v) ethanol, daily. Experimental assays contained 5–40 μl of these lipoic compounds, while control assays contained the same volume of 95% (v/v) ethanol. For all enzymes in this study, one unit of enzyme activity is defined as the formation of one μmole of product or utilization of 1 μmole of substrate per min at 37°. Porcine heart PDC activity was assayed by measuring the 14 CO2  produced from [1-14 C]pyruvate as described previously [19] . The reaction was carried out in the presence of 0.5 mM [1-14 C]pyruvate (200 cpm/nmole), 0.2 mM thiamine pyrophosphate, 0.15 mM coenzyme A and 2 mM NAD+  with or without lipoic compounds (0.25– 4 mM). The reaction was initiated by adding 3.7 μg of porcine heart PDC, and stopped with 0.1 ml of 20% (W/V) trichloroacetic acid containing 30 mM pyruvate after a 4 min reaction at 37°. Released 14 CO2  was absorbed in 0.2 ml of benzothonium hydroxide (Sigma Chemical Company, St. Louis, MO) for 1 h, and the radioactivity was measured in a Beckman LS6500 scintillation counter. As a blank, radioactivity from control assays which contained buffer in place of enzyme was subtracted from other assays. Recombinant human pyruvate dehydrogenase (E1) was overexpressed and purified according to Korotchkina et al. [20] . The activity of E1 was measured using the artificial electron acceptor, 2,6-dichlorophenol-indophenol (Sigma Chemical Company, St. Louis, MO), in the presence of 0–4 mM lipoic compounds with either 0.1 or 5 mM pyruvate in a final volume of 1 ml [21] . The change in absorbance at 600 nm per minute was measured by a SHIMADZU UV160U spectrophotometer and the μmoles of reduced 2,6-dichlorophenol-indo-phenol were calculated using the extinction coefficeint of 15,600 M−1 cm−1 . The activity of dihydrolipoamide acetyltransferase (E2) was measured in the reverse direction [22] . The reaction mixture (1 ml) contained 43.5 mM MOPS, pH 7.4, 0.9 mM dithiothreitol, 0.13 mM NADH, 13.9 mM DL-dihydrolipoamide, 0 to 4 mM lipoic compounds, and about 320 ng of porcine heart PDC. After preincubation for 3 min at 37°, the reaction was started by the addition of [1-14 C]acetyl-CoA (final concentration 0.36 mM, 43,200 cpm), and incubated for up to 4.5 min. The radioactive product was extracted with benzene, and was counted in a Beckman LS6500 scintillation counter. Radioactivity from control samples without added enzyme was subtracted as blank. Recombinant human E3 was overexpressed by Escherichia coli  XL-1 Blue cells with pPROEX-1 expression vector (Life Technologies, Inc.; Gaithersburg, MD) containing cloned human E3 cDNA (coding region for mature E3 protein) [Y. S. Hong and M. S. Patel (unpublished work)]. E3 activities in the forward and reverse directions were measured as described [3] . For the forward reaction, the 1 ml reaction mixture contained 100 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 8.0, 3 mM DL-dihydrolipoamide, 3 mM NAD+ , and 1.5 mM EDTA. The reverse reaction contained 100 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 6.3, 3 mM lipoamide (or varying levels of other lipoic compounds), 0.2 mM NAD+  and 0.2 mM NADH. NAD+  was needed to eliminate the initial lag period in the reaction [3] . The reaction was initiated by the addition of E3. The rates of NADH production (forward) or consumption (reverse) per min were measured at 340 nm. Km s and Vmax s were obtained from double reciprocal plots of each E3 reverse reaction obtained by varying concentrations of lipoic compounds (R-LA, 0.07–0.3 mM; S-LA, 0.5–4 mM; Se-LA, 0.18–0.625 mM; DL-dihydrolipoamide, 0.48-1.8 mM) as substrates. k cat , the number of product molecules per active site of the enzyme per sec, was calculated based on Vmax  and 2 active sites per E3 dimer. Pyruvate decarboxylation was carried out using [1-14 C]pyruvate with cultured HepG2 cells (American Type Culture Collection; Rockville, MD). HepG2 cells were cultured in minimum essential medium (MEM) containing 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum [24] . Confluent HepG2 cells were harvested by trypsinization and separated by centrifugation, and washed with MEM containing 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum. To convert inactive phosphorylated PDC into the active dephosphorylated form, cells were suspended in MEM with serum containing 5 mM dichloroacetic acid and incubated at 37° for 15 min. After being collected by centrifugation, cells were washed twice with phosphate buffered saline containing 5 mM dichloroacetic acid (inhibitor of E1 kinases). Final cell suspensions were made in 2.5 ml of phosphate buffered saline containing 5 mM dichloroacetic acid and kept on ice until used. The reaction mixture (100 μl) contained 94 μl (5–10 mg/ml total protein) of HepG2 cell suspensions, 5 μl of lipoic compounds (final 1–4 mM range where indicated), and 1 μl of 50 mM [1-14 C]pyruvate (200 cpm/nmole). Cells were incubated at 37° for 5 min in a sealed test tube, and the pyruvate decarboxylation reaction was terminated by injecting 0.1 ml of 20% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid with 30 mM pyruvate to the reaction mixture. To trap the liberated 14 CO2 , 0.2 ml of benzothonium hydroxide was injected into a hanging plastic cup in a sealed tube with a rubber stopper, and the evolved 14 CO2  was absorbed for 1 h and the radioactivity was measured in a Beckman LS6500 scintillation counter. Radioactivity from the blank (without cells and lipoic compound) was subtracted from total counts. Pyruvate metabolism via pyruvate carboxylase and subsequent oxidation in the tricarboxylic acid cycle was measured using the protocol described for pyruvate decarboxylation except HepG2 cells were treated with 1 mM n-octanoic acid instead of dichloroacetic acid in both preincubation and incubation of the cells. The oxidation of n-octanoic acid is shown to stimulate E1 kinase activity, resulting in the phosphorylation (and hence inactivation) of PDC [25] .   Results In a previous study, two enantiomers of LA (R-LA and S-LA) were found to have different effects on the overall activity of PDC from mammalian and prokaryotic sources [17] . We, therefore, reinvestigated the effect of R-LA and S-LA and also investigated the effect of Se-LA on this complex. Overall activity of porcine heart PDC was markedly inhibited by both R-LA and S-LA, showing at least 80% inhibition by 1 mM or higher concentrations of LA (Fig. 1) .   In comparison, Se-LA-mediated PDC inhibition was weaker, requiring a much higher concentration of Se-LA (4 mM) to achieve about 65% inhibition (Fig. 1) . Since LA-mediated inhibition of overall PDC activity could be due to the inhibition of one or more catalytic components of the complex, the effects of lipoic compounds were tested on the three catalytic components of mammalian PDC. In the forward reaction, the E3 component of the complex reoxidizes exogenous DL-dihydrolipoamide as a substrate [3] . The effects of lipoic compounds on the forward reaction of recombinant human E3 were examined. Up to 1 mM, Se-LA was more effective as an effector (approximately 25% reduction) than R-LA and S-LA (Fig. 2) .   However, at higher concentrations, these three compounds affected E3 activity similarly, lowering about 30–45% at a concentration of 4 mM (Fig. 2) . This low level of E3 activity by R-LA and S-LA did not account for the observed high level of inhibition seen on the overall activity of PDC at lower concentrations of these two compounds (Fig. 1) . Also, the low level of apparent inhibition implied that NADH, the product of the forward reaction, was probably used as a substrate for the reverse reaction of E3 in the presence of added oxidized lipoic compounds. Therefore, the activity of E3 in the reverse direction with R-LA, S-LA, Se-LA, and DL-lipoamide as a substrate was determined, and the results are summarized in Table 1 .   E3 had a significantly higher affinity for R-LA, the natural enantiomer, than S-LA, but k cat  was not significantly different for these two compounds. Km  for Se-LA was similar to that of R-LA and the calculated k cat  value for Se-LA was comparable to that of R-LA or S-LA. In contrast, DL-lipoamide was the preferred substrate for the reverse reaction of E3 (Table 1) . The catalytic efficiency (k cat  /Km ) was highest with DL-lipoamide and lowest with S-LA. These findings suggested that these lipoic compounds could account for a partial reoxidation of NADH at higher concentrations but failed to support a high degree of PDC inhibition observed at lower concentrations of R-LA and S-LA (Fig. 1) . E1 is the rate-limiting component of the complex [26] . Using a dye assay, E1 activity was determined over a range of pyruvate concentrations (0–5 mM) with a fixed concentration (4 mM) of lipoic compounds. R-LA and S-LA had no significant effect on E1 activity over a wide range of substrate concentrations (Fig. 3A) .   In contrast, 4 mM Se-LA inhibited E1 activity by about 70% at 0.1 and 5 mM pyruvate. When the effect of varying concentrations of lipoic compounds were investigated on E1 activity at two different pyruvate concentrations (0.1 and 5 mM), only a significant inhibitory effect by Se-LA on E1 activity was noted (Fig. 3B) , consistent with the results seen in Fig. 3A . To examine the effect of lipoic compounds on E2 activity, the activity of porcine heart E2 was measured in the reverse direction using [1-14 C]acetyl-CoA and dihydrolipoamide as substrates. Both R-LA and S-LA displayed similar concentration-dependent inhibitory effects on the E2 activity (Fig. 4) .   At 0.5 mM and 4.0 mM R-LA or S-LA , the E2 activity was inhibited by approximately 45% and 80%, respectively (Fig. 4) . In a separate experiment in which DL-dihydrolipoamide was omitted from the incubation medium, the acetylation of each lipoic compound added accounted less than 10% of the radioactivity extracted in benzene layer compared to that of control with DL-dihydrolipoamide. A significant inhibition of E2 activity by R-LA or S-LA at or below 0.5 mM could explain, at least in part, the observed inhibition of PDC activity by R-LA or S-LA (Fig. 1) . At 2 mM, Se-LA had no significant inhibitory effect on E2 activity, and only at higher concentrations (3-4 mM) it inhibited (about 25%) E2 activity (Fig. 4) . The findings of the previous studies and the present study show the inhibitory effects of the lipoic compounds on the activities of PDC and its catalytic components. In light of the inhibitory effects of lipoic compounds on purified PDC components, it was of interest to examine the possible effects of these compounds on pyruvate decarboxylation via PDC by intact cells. The inhibition of pyruvate oxidation in intact cells by LA compounds could impair carbohydrate metabolism. It should be noted that the formation of 14 CO2  from [1-14 C]pyruvate in the intact cells occurs via the action of PDC as well as the formation of oxaloacetate by pyruvate carboxylase and the subsequent metabolism of oxaloacetate via the tricarboxylic acid cycle. The results presented for control cells without the addition of any lipoic compounds (Fig. 5A, B)   show that the formation of 14 CO2  from [1-14 C]pyruvate via PDC accounted for the majority (99%) of pyruvate oxidation (Fig. 5A) , and the 14 CO2  production from the metabolism of pyruvate via pyruvate carboxylase and the tricarboxylic acid cylce was negligible under our experimental conditions (Fig. 5B) . Pyruvate decarboxylation by cultured HepG2 cells was not affected in the presence of 1–4 mM R-LA in the incubation medium compared to that of control (Fig. 5A) . However, approximately 25–30% decrease in pyruvate decarboxylation was seen in cells treated with either 4 mM S-LA or DL-dihydrolipoamide and about 75% reduction in pyruvate decarboxylation was observed with cells treated with 4 mM Se-LA (Fig. 5A) .  Discussion The results presented in this paper for the inhibitory effects of both R- and S-enantiomers of lipoic acid on the overall reaction of PDC from porcine heart support and extend the inhibitory effects of these two compounds on PDC from bovine heart [17] . The degree of inhibition, however, was more pronounced in the present study. For example, 1 mM of either R-LA or S-LA inhibited pig heart PDC by about 80% (Fig. 1)  as compared to the reported 25% and 41% inhibition of bovine heart PDC by 1 mM of R-LA and S-LA, respectively [17] . Loffelhardt et al. [17]  also observed that at low concentrations (less than 1 mM) of both enantiomers of LA, the overall reaction of the PDC from rat kidney was activated. These investigators observed even greater stimulatory effects of these two compounds on the PDC activity from E. coli [17] . These species- and tissue-specific effects of R-LA and S-LA on the PDC activity are difficult to rationalize at the present time and may require a systematic study of highly purified enzyme complexes from different species. There, however, are several important differences in the experimental approaches used between the study reported by Loffelhardt et al. [17]  and the present study. First, Loffelhardt et al. studied PDC preparations from several sources at different stages of purification [17] , whereas we have used highly purified porcine heart PDC and overexpressed PDC components in the present study. Second, Loffelhardt et al. [17]  examined the effects of LA and its analogs on the E1 and E3 components of PDC only and did not investigate the effect of lipoic acid enantiomers on the E2 component of PDC. In the present study, we observed that both R-LA and S-LA at 1 mM concentration exerted higher inhibitory effect on PDC-E2 than on either PDC-E1 or E3 (compare Fig. 4  vs Figs. 2  or 3). Third, there are differences in kinetic parameters for mammalian E3 catalyzing the reverse reaction (oxidation of NADH) between the study of Loffelhardt et al. [17]  and the present study. In the former study the Km  of S-LA was only slightly higher than that of R-LA (5.5 mM vs 3.7 mM) whereas in the present study this difference was about 17-fold (K m   values of 9.10 mM and 0.53 mM for S-LA and R-LA, respectively; Table 1 ). Similarly, the catalytic efficiency (k cat /K m  ) of R-LA was higher compared to S-LA by a factor of 36 in previously reported study [17]  whereas this factor was 153 in the present study. Fourth, E3 from human renal carcinoma had a Km value of 18 mM for R-LA and S-LA was found to be inactive as a substrate by Loffelhardt et al. [17] . In contrast, in the present study we observed both R-LA and S-LA are used as substrates (in the reverse reaction) for human liver E3 and Km  values for these two enantiomers (0.53 mM for R-LA and 9.1 mM for S-LA) are lower than that reported (18 mM for R-LA) for partially purified PDC-E3 from human kidney carcinoma [17] . The inhibition of PDC-E2 activity by both R-LA and S-LA was the major contribution to the observed inhibition of PDC activity. However, much higher levels of LA (0.5–1 mM) than is present physiologically were required to attain a significant inhibition (50%) of this component’s activity. If exogenous lipoic acid is provided in large quantities as a daily supplement, it may be possible that intracellular and more importantly intramitochondrial concentrations of LA could be raised to a range that would influence E2 activity in the mitochondria. However, the likelihood of this possibility is low (Fig. 5)  because LA is reduced to dihydrolipoic acid by the action of E3 and glutathione reductase, and subsequently dihydrolipoic acid is readily transported out of the cell [11]  Furthermore, since both R-LA and S-LA had no significant effect on the activity of E1, the rate-limiting step in the overall reaction of PDC, it is suggested that a partial inhibition of E2 and E3 components may not have any significant effect on the carbon flux through PDC in the cell (Fig. 5) . This study demonstrated for the first time that the site of Se-LA-mediated inhibition of PDC activity is different than that of LA. Inhibition of PDC activity required higher concentrations of Se-LA compared to R-LA or S-LA (Fig. 1) . Although Se-LA was as effective as R-LA and S-LA in the inhibition of E3 activity in the forward direction (Fig. 2) , it inhibited E2 activity marginally in comparison to that of R-LA and S-LA (Fig. 4) . Since E1 is the rate-limiting step in the overall reaction of the PDC, when there is no inhibition, the rate at which NADH is generated is indirectly controlled by E1 activity in the complex. Se-LA inhibited the activity of the E1 component (Fig. 3) , and the extent of inhibition by Se-LA of this component closely paralleled inhibition of the overall activity of PDC (Fig. 1) , indicating that Se-LA and R- or S-LA act on different components of PDC. Since Se-LA was recognized as a substrate for the reverse reaction of E3, we studied the kinetic aspects of these lipoic compounds on the E3 reverse direction. Our findings demonstrated that the K m   and k cat  for DL-lipoamide on the reverse reaction of E3, calculated as 1.39 mM and 719 s−1 , respectively, are in agreement with the previously published results [3] . Since a mixture of D- and L-forms of lipoamide was used in both experiments, it was not surprising to find a higher Km  than that of R-LA. Furthermore, the approximately 70 fold higher k cat  with DL-lipoamide, compared to those for the other lipoic compounds, indicates that DL-lipoamide is the preferred substrate for the reverse reaction of E3 among the lipoic compounds tested (Table 1) . The differential effect of lipoic compounds on pyruvate oxidation by intact HepG2 cells (Fig. 5)  suggests that PDC as well as its catalytic components are affected based on the stereoselectivity of the lipoic compounds. Our findings also indicate that R-LA is not inhibitory at the extracellular level of up to 4 mM (Fig. 5A)  which may not be readily attained by supplementation of R-LA. Blumenthal [27]  suggested that the addition of free R,S-lipoic acid caused the sequestration of intramitochondrial free CoA by the formation of lipoyl-CoA and reduction in gluconeogenesis from lactate and pyruvate by rat hepatocytes. Our results, however do not support this suggestion because there was no significant decrease in the rate of pyruvate decarboxylation which requires the participation of free CoA by intact HepG2 cells with lipoic acids (Fig. 5) . In summary, the influence of R-LA and S-LA on the activity of mammalian PDC components differs from that of Se-LA. Since LA (R and S forms) has very little effect on the activity of the E1 component which is the rate-limiting step of the PDC, R-LA, the natural enantiomer, would not be expected to exert any significant effect on pyruvate metabolism via PDC in the cell. Furthermore, the high catalytic efficiency of the E3 component and its reversible action provides a means for the conversion of exogenous oxidized LA to DHLA which is a potent reductant (redox modulator) and cellular anti-oxidant. The findings of this study are consistent with the observed improvements in glucose utilization by mammalian tissues in the presence of lipoic acid [6–8] . Our findings clearly show that in contrast to S-LA, R-LA is a better substrate for E3 and displays no inhibitory effect on pyruvate decarboxylation by intact cells. It, therefore, is suggested that R-LA, and not a racemic mixture of R- and S-LA, should be considered a choice for therapeutic applications. [23]    Acknowledgements We thank Dr. Murray Ettinger of State University of New York at Buffalo and Dr. Thomas E. Roche of Kansas State University for their critical reading of the manuscript. This study was supported in part by USPHS Grants DK42885 (MSP) and DK50430 (LP).   
