 Influenza viruses have been responsible for epidemics of febrile respiratory infections for hundreds of years. Individuals with acute influenza A infection characteristically develop the acute onset of fever, myalgias and headache, followed by a severe upper respiratory illness with cough lasting for days or weeks. Some influenza cases progress to a morbid or fatal lower respiratory infection. During the great pandemic of 1918–1919, more persons succumbed to complications of influenza infection than were killed during the four preceding years of World War I[1] . The efficacy of vaccination against influenza viruses has been limited by the ability of the virus to alter its antigenic structure, a relatively short duration of immunity, and incomplete protection provided by tolerable doses of these vaccines. 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D3, also known as calcitriol, has potent effects on cytokine production and immune functions in animals and humans[2–6] . The addition of calcitriol to a variety of vaccine preparations has been shown to augment induced immunity to herpes simplex virus, tetanus toxoid, hepatitis B surface antigen and HIV gp160[7–9] . Calcitriol coadministered with trivalent influenza vaccine in mice enhanced both mucosal and sytemic antibody responses[10, 11] . Coadministration of calcitriol in this study also enhanced the vaccinated animals' ability to neutralize live influenza virus instilled into the nose. Serum influenza hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) titers reflect the ability of the host immune response to neutralize infectivity of the virus. Most importantly, higher HAI titers are correlated with the protection of humans from influenza virus induced respiratory disease[12] . The following prospective, randomized, double-blind clinical trial evaluated calcitriol as a potential vaccine-enhancing agent when coadministered with split-killed influenza vaccine in healthy human volunteers. We hypothesized that calcitriol and influenza vaccine would have a significant enhancing effect on influenza hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) titers compared to a parallel control group that received influenza vaccine and placebo.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Subjects and vaccinations One-hundred seventy-five healthy volunteers were enrolled and vaccinated in the deltoid muscle with 0.5 ml 1996–1997 trivalent split-killed influenza vaccine (Fluzone, Connaught Laboratories, Inc., Swiftwater, PA) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. At this time, the vaccinees also received 1.0 mL (1.0 μg) of intramuscular calcitriol (Calcijex, Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago, IL) or a matching saline placebo at a site adjacent to and 1.0 cm distant from the influenza vaccination site. The 1.0 cm separation of the two injections was chosen to comply with federal regulations yet still allow the in vivo mixing of the two agents necessary for the immunologic effects of calcitriol. The 1.0 μg dose of calcitriol was chosen based on efficacy in preclinical animal studies and on a study showing a lack of toxicity in normal human volunteers[13, 14] . The calcitriol or placebo injections were administered in a randomized, double-blind manner at a ratio of 1:1. The subjects were vaccinated and observed in the Clinical Research Center within the University of Utah Medical Center. Serum samples were obtained at the time of vaccination and 30 and 90 days postvaccination. Serum was stored at −20°C. before thawing and analysis. The study was reviewed and authorized by the University of Utah Institutional Review Board and by the US Food and Drug Administration. The randomization schedule and study drug were prepared by the University of Utah Investigational Pharmacy. The blind was held there until the dataset was finalized. All the subjects were 18–49 years of age (male or female), in good physical health and willing to provide written informed consent. Female subjects in their childbearing years were willing to perform an effective method of contraception during the study period. Subjects were excluded if they (1) were pregnant or lactating, (2) had received an investigational drug within the last 30 days, (3) had a history of malignancy, renal failure, nephrolithiasis, hypercalcemia, hyperparathyroidism, hypervitaminosis D or other serious underlying illnesses, (4) were using oral steroids, had used oral or IV calcitriol within the past 2 months or calcium supplementation in the past 2 days, (5) had already received any 1996–1997 influenza vaccine or (6) had known sensitivity to influenza vaccines, calcitriol or any components of these commercial preparations. Medical histories and physical examinations were performed on all the subjects before inclusion and vaccination. To detect potential hypercalcemia due to intramuscular injection of calcitriol, the first 20 subjects had serum calcium and phosphorus determinations at the time of vaccination and 24 h later. The subjects were asked to record daily oral temperatures, general symptoms (malaise, fatigue) and local symptoms (redness, swelling and soreness at the injection sites) the day of and for 3 days following vaccination. Queries were made about adverse events and concomitant medications at the 30- and 90-day follow up visits. A brief questionnaire intended to elicit signs and symptoms of clinical influenza was administered at the 90-day follow-up visit.  2.2 Serologies The primary end-point of this study was the comparison of serum hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) titers in the calcitriol/vaccine group compared with the placebo/vaccine group. Sera were thawed, treated overnight at 37°C with receptor destroying enzyme (Sigma, Cat #C8772), diluted 1:20 and serum HAI titers determined by a standard method[15] . Titers are reported as the highest dilution of sera that showed complete inhibition of agglutination. HAI titers for each of the three 1996–1997 influenza antigens: H1N1, H3N2 and B were compared between the groups in two ways: (1) comparison of the mean and median rises above baseline at 30 and 90 days (paired analysis), (2) comparisons between the groups at 0 (baseline), 30 and 90 days (unpaired). Secondary end-points of the trial were comparisons of serum ELISA titers to the influenza antigens H1N1, H3N2 and B and the presence of clinical influenza syndrome in the subjects. Antibody to subtype-specific Influenza hemagglutinin is measured by hemagglutination inhibition according to a standard CDC protocol using each of the above three antigens (H1N1, H3N2 and B; CDC, Atlanta, GA). Titers were log2 -transformed for analysis as follows: 0=no hemagglutinating activity, 1=1:10, 2=1:20, 3=1: 40, 4=1:80, etc.  2.3 Statistical analysis We estimated that 63 evaluable patients per group (126 total) would be required to detect a one log2  (twofold) increase in postvaccination serum HAI titers between the groups. The group size was determined using an estimated mean HAI titer in the control group of 4.0 log units, a standard deviation of 2.0 log units, significance at the p =0.05 level and a power to detect of 80% (β =0.20). Demographic parameters, serologic titers and adverse events were compared using the nonparametric Mann–Whitney (unpaired) or Wilcoxan (paired) tests.   3 Results 3.1 Demographics A total of 175 subjects were enrolled and vaccinated during the influenza season beginning in October, 1996 and ending in January, 1997. The distributions of sex, race and age were not significantly different between the placebo and calcitriol groups (Table 1  ). Most of the subjects were young and white; many were medical students at the University of Utah.  3.2 Safety analysis None of the calcitriol/vaccine or placebo vaccine recipients experienced laboratory-defined or clinical symptoms of hypercalcemia. There were no significant differences in serum calcium levels between the calcitriol and placebo groups either pretreatment (SCa2+ =9.6 and 9.4 mg/dl, respectively) or one day postinjection (SCa2+ =9.5 and 9.4 mg/dl, respectively). Nearly all the subjects experienced some pain at the injection site which declined rapidly over the following few days (Fig. 1  ). Subjects in the calcitriol+flu vaccine group were more likely to still be experiencing pain at the injection site 2 and 3 days postvaccination compared with the placebo+flu vaccine group. Overall, 25–50% of the subjects reported some generalized malaise or fatigue on the day of or 1–3 days after their injections. Those that received calcitriol were more likely to experience malaise and fatigue 1–2 days after injection (time-course data not shown), but the overall frequency of these symptoms were not significantly different between the groups. No significant differences in redness or swelling at the injection site were observed between the groups at any time-point. Only a single subject experienced fever postvaccination.  3.3 Efficacy analysis Among the 88 subjects enrolled in the placebo group, 77 (88%) followed through and provided serum for analysis 28 and 90 days postvaccination. In the calcitriol group 76 of 87 subjects (87%) provided serum for analysis at the subsequent time points. Baseline (day 0) influenza HAI titers for all three antigens were similar between the calcitriol and placebo groups (Fig. 2  ). Including all subjects in both groups, the mean absolute HAI titers prevaccination were H1N1 4.3, H3N2 2.3 and influenza B 3.1 log2  units (Fig. 2 ). These titers rose significantly to 6.2, 4.8 and 4.9 log2  units, respectively, at 28 days postvaccination. HAI titers against each antigen decreased slightly between 28 and 90 days postvaccination but remained above prevaccination levels. Coinjection of calcitriol with the influenza vaccine failed to significantly increase 28 day or 90 day HAI titers against H1N1, H3N2 or influenza B antigens. To determine whether preexisting immunity to any of the influenza antigens might influence a calcitriol enhanced response, a censored analysis of the serologic data was performed. Subjects who were relatively naive to influenza antigens, defined as baseline (day 0) H1N1, H3N2 or influenza B HAI titers ≤3 log units (1:40 or less) were included in this subanalysis. The number of subjects available for these subanalyses were: influenza B, N =49 (placebo), 46 (calcitriol); H1N1, N =24, 33; H3N2, N =58, 58. HAI titers for each of the influenza antigens in these naive subjects were not significantly different at either 28 or 90 days postvaccination (data not shown). Similar nonsignificant results were obtained when responses were analyzed from subjects with baseline HAI titers of ≤2 log units (1:20 or less).   4 Discussion This double blind, placebo-controlled study of calcitriol coinjected with a commercial influenza vaccine did not confirm the hypothesized immunologic benefit of this compound. Intramuscular calcitriol coinjection did not significantly enhance subsequent serum HAI titers to any of the vaccine antigens compared to a saline placebo. Calcitriol injection was more painful and resulted in more malaise and fatigue than placebo in our subjects. There are several important limitations to the conclusions which may be drawn from this controlled human study. It should be noted that prior exposure and immunity to influenza viruses within the study population, the manner in which calcitriol and the trivalent influenza vaccines were delivered, and the use of systemic HAI titers as the primary endpoint may all have had a masking effect on the immunomodulatory properties of calcitriol. Since HAI titers rather than ELISA are associated with protection from clinical influenza and HAI analysis failed to show a benefit from calcitriol, ELISA was not performed on the serum specimens. The subjects in this study were young (mean age 32) and predominantly white. Significant baseline HAI titers against each vaccine antigen were detected in nearly all the subjects (Fig. 2 ), indicating that the subjects had considerable immunity to influenza before their vaccination. This is understandable in our study population, which included many medical students and members of the hospital staff required to have annual influenza vaccinations. Nevertheless, vaccination of our subjects did result in a 4–8-fold (2–3 log2  units) increase in HAI titers measured one month later. The study was designed to detect a twofold difference (one log2  unit) in HAI titers between the treated and control groups postvaccination. It is possible that there was a small positive effect of calcitriol that was undetectable by these methods. However, the nearly identical values of mean HAI titers between the groups at all the timepoints argues against any real effect of calcitriol on humoral immunity in these subjects. Malaise and fatigue were more likely to have been experienced in the calcitriol-injected subjects and were also associated with pain at the injection site 2–3 days after injection. Malaise, fatigue, redness and swelling were self-reported, necessarily somewhat subjective and probably overreported by the subjects. Since a sham-vaccine group was not included in this trial, it cannot be concluded that the vaccine itself caused these subjective symptoms. The increased pain observed in the calcitriol-injected subjects may be related to the relatively large molecular weight of this compound or to its vehicle formulated for intravenous use. The injection of calcitriol next to but 1.0 cm distant from the site of influenza injection may have limited the in vivo contact of calcitriol with influenza antigens. Adjacent injection rather than direct mixing of the two compounds was necessary to comply with federal regulations and gain FDA approval for the study. It is possible that mixing of calcitriol and influenza vaccine in a single syringe, like in the preliminary animal experiments, might also be effective in humans. Finally, serum rather than mucosal antibody levels were measured in these subjects. Preclinical studies in mice showed that, while serum influenza antibody levels were enhanced by calcitriol, a much more dramatic effect was seen on mucosal antibodies in vaginal fluid[10, 11] . Future studies which employ calcitriol as a candidate vaccine immunomodulator should incorporate the measurement of nasal, oral or vaginal mucosal antibodies. In summary, calcitriol had no demonstrable immunologic effects on influenza vaccination at this dose and route in this relatively young healthy population. Side effects, particularly pain at the injection site, were increased by the coadministration of calcitriol with influenza vaccine. Other strategies should be employed to boost the effectiveness and duration of immunity of influenza vaccines.   Acknowledgements The authors wish to thank Dr. James Kushner and the staff of the University of Utah Clinical Research Center for the use of their facility and expertise in completing this study and Dr. Raymond A. Daynes for reviewing the manuscript. This investigation was supported by research grant number M01-RR00064 from the National Center for Research Resources, and by Pharmadigm Biosciences, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT.   
