 Cytochromes P-450 (P450) catalyse terminal (ω ) and subterminal (ω -1 to ω -6) hydroxylations of fatty acids in microorganisms, plants, insects, non-mammalian vertebrates, and mammals. These activities are mediated by several members of the CYP4 family in mammals [16] . In addition, some CYP2 isoforms are involved in lauric acid subterminal hydroxylations in fish [4] . The CYP4 isozymes have been characterized in several organs such as liver, kidney, lung, colon, and small intestine. Cloning and heterologous expression of many of them demonstrate their involvement in the oxidation of fatty acids, prostaglandins and leukotrienes, mainly at the ω  position in mammals [16] . The physiological role of fatty acid hydroxylases remains unclear. Several lines of evidence indicate that oxygenated polyunsaturated fatty acids act as modulators of various cell functions [24] . Ortiz de Montellano and Reich [25]  described fatty acid acetylenic analogues which selectively inhibit P450 activities based on their substrate specificity. Such inhibitors have been used successfully to investigate the functional role of several fatty acid hydroxylases [9,40] . P450 expression is induced by numerous drugs and chemicals [22] . Peroxisome proliferators, such as hypolipidemic drugs (fibrates), herbicides (2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid), and phthalate ester plasticizers (DEHP) induce ω -hydroxylation of fatty acids in rodents and increase expression of several mammalian CYP4 genes [2,22,23] . Fatty acid hydroxylase activities from other organisms, such as plants [26]  and bacteria [6] , are also sensitive to peroxisome proliferators. Most of the CYP2 isozymes are not induced by peroxisome proliferators, but by other class of xenobiotics such as phenobarbital [22] . Most investigations involving fish P450 have concerned activities toward environmental pollutants, such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and polychlorobiphenyls (PCBs), or endogenous substrates (steroids). Limited information is available about LAH activities in fish. Previous studies by Lemaire et al. [17]  have shown that starvation increases LAH activities in sea bass liver, as reported for rat [11] . A recent report by Buhler et al. [4]  indicates that both trout liver microsomes and purified CYP2K1 protein hydroxylate lauric acid at several subterminal positions. A cDNA fragment was recently isolated from rainbow trout liver and classified in the CYP4 gene family (CYP4T1, [7] ). Surprisingly, Scarano et al. [28] , and Miranda et al. [18]  reported that rainbow trout was insensitive to peroxisome proliferators (gemfibrozil, dehydroepiandrosterone), compounds which are known to induce P450-dependent hydroxylation of fatty acids and peroxisome proliferation in rodents [37] . With the aim of developing new biological markers specific for another class of chemical pollutants (peroxisome proliferators, especially the phthalates), we have studied the effect of these compounds on the cytochrome P450-dependent LAH activities in sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax)  tissues. LAH activities and the ratios of each metabolite formed were compared for liver, kidney and small intestine microsomes from control or fish treated with peroxisome-proliferators (clofibrate and DEHP). In addition, microsomes from liver and kidney were incubated with a series of lauric acid analogues containing terminal and internal acetylenes, 9-dodecynoic (9-DDYA), 10-dodecynoic (10-DDYA) and 11-dodecynoic (11-DDYA) acids, in order to compare inactivation kinetics.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Chemicals Clofibrate, DEHP, NADPH, glucose-6-phosphate (G-6-P), and yeast glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G-6-PDH) were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich Chimie (France). [1-14 C]lauric acid (2.19×1012  Bq mol−1 ) was from the Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique (CEA, Gif sur Yvette, France). Acetonitrile (HPLC grade) and silica gel plates were from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). 11-DDYA, 10-DDYA and 9-DDYA were synthesized from 1-bromo-6-hexanol, 1-bromo-7-heptanol and 1-bromo-9-nonanol, respectively, according to Alayrac et al. [1] .  2.2 Fish Sexually immature sea bass (D. labrax , 100–200 g) were obtained from the fish farm ‘Théoule Aquaculture’ (France) and placed in aquaria containing 120 l of artificial sea water (salinity 28‰) at 18°C. An acclimation period of at least 2 weeks was needed to reduce stress-related responses. Three groups of ten fish were treated for 3 days by daily intraperitoneal injection of clofibrate (100 mg (kg body weight)−1  day−1 , in NaCl 0.9%), DEHP (1.5 g (kg body weight)−1  day−1 , in NaCl 0.9%) or NaCl 0.9% (control).  2.3 Sample preparation Fish were sacrificed by severing their spinal cord, and liver, kidney, and intestinal mucosa were collected and rinsed in ice-cold 150 mM KCl. Tissues were homogenized in 5 vol. of buffer A (250 mM sucrose, 10 mM Hepes, pH 7.4), containing 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF and 1 mM DTT. Homogenates were centrifuged at 9000×g  for 15 min at 4°C. Resulting supernatants were then centrifuged at 100 000×g  for 90 min at 4°C. Microsomal pellets were resuspended in buffer A containing 20% glycerol (v/v), and stored at −70°C. Protein concentrations were determined according to the Bradford’s method, with BSA as a standard.  2.4 Enzyme activities LAH activities were measured as previously described by Weissbart et al. [35] . All assays were carried out at 28°C in a final reaction mixture of 0.2 ml containing 50 μM [1-14 C]lauric acid, 0.02 M sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.4, 0.1–0.2 mg microsomal proteins, and 1 mM NADPH plus a regenerating system (consisting of 1 mM β -NADP, 6.7 mM G-6-P, and 0.4 IU of G-6-PDH final concentrations). The reaction was stopped after 20 min by addition of 0.2 ml of ice-cold acetonitrile containing 0.2% acetic acid. Proteins were pelleted by rapid centrifugation (13 000×g , 2 min) and 0.1 ml of supernatant was injected into a RP-HPLC column or spotted on silica gel plates. Total specific activity (nmol min−1  mg−1  of microsomal proteins) was calculated by adding the amounts of each metabolite formed.  2.5 Inactivation with mechanism-based inhibitors Five livers or kidneys from DEHP- or clofibrate-treated fish were pooled and homogenized prior to microsomes preparation. Microsomes were first preincubated at 28°C with 1 mM NADPH and the regenerating system described above, in the presence of various concentrations (20, 40, 60 or 80 μM) of inhibitor (9-DDYA, 10-DDYA or 11-DDYA) as described by Salaün et al. [27] . Mixtures containing no n-DDYA or no NADPH served as controls. One hundred microliters of aliquots of preincubated microsomes were removed at different intervals (0, 6, 10, 20 and 30 min) and transferred to incubation mixtures containing [1-14 C]lauric acid, as described above, in a final volume of 0.2 ml. Mixtures were further incubated at 28°C for 5 min to measure residual activities of lauric acid hydroxylation, and the reactions were stopped by adding 0.2 ml of ice-cold acetonitrile containing 0.2% acetic acid. Metabolites (100 μl aliquots) were resolved by silica thin-layer chromatography developed with diethyl ether/light petroleum (bp 40–60°)/formic acid (70:30:1, v/v/v). Radioactive products were located by autoradiography, scraped into counting vials, and the radioactivity was measured with a liquid scintillation counter (Wallac 1410, EG&G).  2.6 HPLC conditions RP-HPLC analysis was performed using an Alltima C18 column (15 cm×4.6 mm, Alltech) at 1.5 ml min−1  with acetic acid/0.2% water and a linear gradient of acetonitrile from 44% to 97% over a 37-min period. The HPLC eluate containing radioactive metabolites was passed through a Flow-One Beta radioactive flow detector (Radiomatic) to quantify each [1-14 C]hydroxylated product formed.  2.7 GC/MS analysis Compounds isolated by RP-HPLC were chemically hydrogenated (H2  and Pd/charcoal) as described by Weissbart et al. [35] , and reanalysed by RP-HPLC to verify peak collection before mass spectra analysis. GC and electron impact (70 eV) ionization mass spectrometry analyses were performed as described elsewhere [35] . Characteristic fragment ions generated from positional isomers of n-monohydroxylated lauric acids were identified as previously described [9,17] .  2.8 Statistical analysis Significance of differences (for each metabolite formed) between controls and treated fish groups was evaluated using the non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis test [15]  at P <0.005 level. Groups were then compared by pairs using the Mann–Whitney test (P <0.05).   3 Results 3.1 Characterization of lauric acid hydroxylase activities from liver, kidney, and intestinal microsomes Microsomal LAH activities from liver, kidney, and intestinal mucosa were O2 - and NADPH-dependent and were inhibited in the presence of a CO/O2  mixture suggesting the involvement of cytochrome P-450 in these reactions (data not shown). Products of lauric acid hydroxylation were resolved by RP-HPLC analysis into five radiolabelled metabolites. Retention times were compared with those of standards and methylester trimethylsilylether derivatives of metabolites were further identified by a GC-MS analysis (previously reported by Lemaire et al. [17] ) as (ω -1)-, (ω -2)-, (ω -3)-, (ω -4)- and ω -hydroxylauric acids, respectively. Mass spectra of the methyl ester and trimethylsilyl (TMS) derivatives showed typical fragment ions expected from monohydroxylated fatty acids at m/z †287 [M-15]+ , m/z  271 [M-31]+ , m/z  255 [M-47]+ , m/z  146 [CH2 =C(OSi-(CH3 )3 )OCH3 ]+ , m/z  159 [(CH3 O=C(OSi-(CH3 )3 )CH=CH2 ]+ , and the base peak at m/z  73 (TMS), which were commonly present in all hydroxylated lauric acid metabolites. The same results were obtained for metabolites generated by the three organs from untreated or clofibrate- and DEHP-treated fish. In all cases, all five hydroxylauric acids are generated, indicating that the site-specific oxidative attack of lauric acid remains unchanged. Only the relative proportion of metabolites was changed in terms of organs and fish treatments. Hence, microsomes from liver, kidney, and intestine catalyzed mainly (ω -1)- and (ω -2)-hydroxylations of lauric acid (Table 1  ). In intestine, (ω -1)-hydroxylauric acid represents up to 72% of the metabolites. Three other metabolites including ω- , (ω -3)- and (ω -4)-hydroxylauric acids were produced to a lesser extent in all tissues.  3.2 Tissue-specific induction of LAH activities by clofibrate and DEHP The microsomal LAH activities from the three organs were measured in clofibrate- and DEHP-treated sea bass and compared to activities measured in control fish. Intestinal LAH activity was not induced by clofibrate or DEHP (data not shown). In liver (Fig. 1  (A)), clofibrate had no statistically significant effect on metabolites generated from lauric acid. A significant effect was found in hepatic microsomes from DEHP-treated fish: the production of (ω -1)-, (ω -2)-, and (ω -3)-hydroxylauric acid was increased 1.9-, 2- and 2.7-fold, respectively. In contrast, LAH activities of kidney microsomes were strongly affected, especially by a DEHP treatment. As in liver microsomes, the production of (ω -1), (ω -2), and (ω -3)-hydroxylauric acid was increased, but to higher levels (5.3-, 4- and 4.9-fold, respectively). After clofibrate treatment, only the production of (ω -1)-hydroxylauric acid was increased (2.6-fold).  3.3 Inactivation of lauric acid hydroxylases by suicide-substrates In order to study the substrate selectivity of sea bass P450s involved in the oxidation of lauric acid, we have evaluated the effects on microsomal LAH activities of three lauric acid analogues containing a triple bond in the vicinity of the carbons preferentially attacked (C10 and C11). Liver microsomes were incubated with 9-DDYA, 10-DDYA or 11-DDYA. 10-DDYA was the only analogue tested on sea bass kidney microsomes because of the low amount of biological material obtained from this organ. Preincubation of liver microsomes with 10-DDYA resulted in a drastic decrease in total LAH activity. This loss of activity was dependent on incubation time and on the concentration of inhibitor and it occured only in the presence of NADPH. LAH inactivation fitted pseudo-first-order kinetics (Fig. 2  ). A plot of half-life values (t 1/2 ) against the reciprocal concentrations of inhibitor (Fig. 3  ) allowed for the determination of the apparent binding constant (K i ) and half-life of LAH activity at saturating concentration of inhibitor (T 1/2 ). A pseudo-first-order inactivation constant (k inact ) was calculated from the T1/2 . The different parameters obtained with 10-DDYA and 11-DDYA are recapitulated in Table 2  . On the other hand, 80 μM of 9-DDYA caused only a slight loss of activity (4%) after a 30-min preincubation time (data not shown), indicating that 9-DDYA is a weak inhibitor of LAH activities in liver microsomes.   4 Discussion The involvement of several mammalian CYP4 members in lauric acid hydroxylation is now well documented, but only limited informations are available for fish. Most of the investigations in fish have focused on hepatic P450 isoforms. The ω - to (ω -6)-hydroxylation of lauric acid in liver of rainbow trout has been reported, but only CYP2-mediated activities were investigated [4,39] . Very recently, a partial cDNA sequence isolated from rainbow trout liver was identified as a CYP4 gene [7] , indicating the existence of a P450 belonging to this family in fish. As a first step to develop new biomarkers specific for other classes of marine pollutants (phthalates), we focused our study on the effect of several CYP4 inducers on the cytochrome P450-dependent LAH activities in sea bass tissues. Microsomes from liver, kidney or intestinal mucosa of sea bass catalyzed mainly in-chain hydroxylation (especially (ω -1)- and (ω -2)-hydroxylations) of lauric acid. Such an in-chain hydroxylation of fatty acids (ω -1 to ω -4) is also found in bacteria [20] , yeast [29] , fungi [33] , and some plants [27] . In contrast, hydroxylation of fatty acids occurs mainly at the ω  position in mammals [16] , amphibians [21] , insects [5] , yeast [29] , and Leguminosae [26] . Kidney microsomes catalyzed lauric acid hydroxylation more efficiently than liver microsomes, as was observed in the trout [36]  and in the rat [10] . These results suggests that these P450 systems from kidney are rather specialized for fatty acid (ω -1)-hydroxylation. The hydroxylation of lauric acid at different positions in sea bass could be explained both by several CYP2 [4,19]  and CYP4 gene-mediated activities. Buhler et al. [4]  have reported that CYP2M1 and CYP2K1 catalyse some of the lauric acid (ω -1)- to (ω -6)-hydroxylations but several other CYP isozymes may also contribute to this regiospecific fatty acid metabolism. Indeed, a CYP4T1 gene has been isolated in trout [7] , and four CYP4A isozymes have been characterized in rat liver. CYP4A2 catalyses only ω -hydroxylation whereas CYP4A1 and CYP4A3 catalyses both ω - and (ω -1)-hydroxylations of lauric acid [13,14] . CYP4A1 protein could play two alternative functional roles both in a catabolic process [32]  and in the conversion of arachidonate to signal metabolites [30] . The long-chain dicarboxylic acids formed via the CYP4A1 pathway seems to regulate the peroxisomal β -oxidation enzymes [12] . Moreover, CYP4A1 is regulated by the same mechanism that controls the peroxisomal β -oxidation enzymes: CYP4A1 expression is modified by starvation [11] . Lemaire et al. [17]  have shown that sea bass starvation also increases LAH activities. However, the physiological significance of in-chain hydroxylation by P450 systems in fish is still unknown. Because lipids are a preferential energy source in fish, fatty acid metabolism is a very important biological process for fish [34] . This could explain the great diversity of metabolites formed in sea bass and trout [4] . Several mechanism-based inhibitors of P450 which selectively inhibit P450 isozymes have been previously described: rat hepatic ω -hydroxylases are inactivated by 11-DDYA [25] . The experimental use in vivo of such fatty acid analogues has clarified the functional role of several fatty acid hydroxylases in rat [40]  and in plant [9] . Preincubations of liver or kidney microsomes with 11-DDYA or 10-DDYA in the presence of NADPH resulted in time- and concentration-dependent inhibitions described by pseudo-first order kinetics, which is characteristic of mechanism-based inhibition. 9-DDYA was a very weak inhibitor. These data agree with the highly selective oxidation of lauric acid at the subterminal position by sea bass microsomes whatever the tissue. Yang et al. [38]  have demonstrated that ciprofibrate induces peroxisome proliferation in rainbow trout liver, but such a response was not observed with gemfibrozil [28]  or dehydroepiandrosterone [18] , whereas these compounds are LAH inducers in rodents [24] . Haasch [8]  has reported that catfish’s and bluegill’s liver and kidney showed increased CYP2K1 and CYP2M1 P450 ortholog expression after treatment with fibrates (clofibrate and ciprofibrate). We have studied the effects of clofibrate and DEHP on liver, kidney, and intestinal LAH activities of sea bass. Lauric acid (ω -1)-hydroxylation is strongly induced in sea bass kidney treated with DEHP. The amount of ω -hydroxylauric acid remained unchanged in liver and kidney of clofibrate and DEHP-treated fish as compared to control, although this metabolite is strongly increased in rodents treated with peroxisome proliferators [31] . Thus, the site-specificity of lauric acid oxidative attack in sea bass microsomes was not modified by a treatment with peroxisome proliferators. Methylclofenapate (an hypolipidemic drug, such as clofibrate) induced CYP4A mRNA in mice and rat liver, and to a lesser extent in kidney [3] . In contrast, there was no significant induction of CYP4A in the liver or kidney of guinea-pigs exposed to methylclofenapate [3] . These data suggested that there is species difference in response to peroxisome proliferators between rodents and guinea pig. As in guinea-pig, LAH activities from clofibrate-treated sea bass showed no significant induction in liver. Both clofibrate (and several other fibrates) and phthalates are potent peroxisome proliferators and CYP4 inducers in rodent liver [3] . In contrast, the induction of LAH activity in sea bass is more important in kidney than in liver, and DEHP is by far a more potent inducer of LAH activities than clofibrate. Together, our results are much in favor of the involvement of several P450s in LAH activities in sea bass. Furthermore, we have shown that LAH activities are induced in sea bass kidney by peroxisome proliferators, especially phthalates. Considering that phthalate ester plasticizers represent widely-distributed environmental contaminants, the induction of LAH activities in fish kidney by phthalates could be a first step in the development of efficient biomarkers for this class of marine pollutants. The use of such a biomarker to detect phthalates in sea water will be easier and cheaper than chemical analysis. Moreover, further isolation and cloning of sea bass CYP4 genes from this tissue are currently under way to develop molecular tools.   Acknowledgements This research was supported by a EEC grant (CEE-BIOMAR EV5V-CT94-0550). We are very grateful to Drs David Pauron (INRA, Antibes) and René Feyereisen (University of Arizona, Tucson) for critically reading this manuscript. We would like to thank Dr Charles Mioskowski (CNRS-Faculté de Pharmacie, Strasbourg) for providing us with dodecynoic acids.   
