 The elucidation of N -glycans in plants has raised increasing interest in the past years due to several physiological roles which could be attributed to these structures: correct folding, biological activity and stability of proteins can be affected by the presence of N -glycans (Driouich, Gonnet, Makkie, Laine, & Faye, 1989; Sheldon, & Bowles, 1992; Nagai, & Yamaguchi, 1993) . Moreover, the involvement of N -linked oligosaccharides in plant development was demonstrated (Ettlinger, Schindler, & Lehle, 1986) . Besides these physiological roles, N -glycans can influence the immunogenicity of glycoproteins, representing antigenic epitopes by themselves:(i) The injection of horseradish peroxidase (HRP) into rabbits resulted in polyclonal anti-HRP antiserum which also reacted with many other plant glycoproteins carrying glycans similar to those from horseradish peroxidase. β1,2-xylose, present in all the glycoprotein–glycans of the study, but absent in mammalian organisms, was supposed to be responsible for the observed cross-reactivity (Faye, Johnson, Sturm, & Chrispeels, 1993) .  (ii) The crossreactivity of a polyclonal antiserum against HRP with other plant glycoproteins and with bee-venom phospholipase A2 , due to a common carbohydrate epitope could be demonstrated. (Prenner, Mach, Glössl, & März, 1992 ; Wilson, Harthill, Mullin, Ashford, & Altmann, 1998). Chemical defucosylation as well as ELISA inhibition experiments indicated that α1,3-fucose is sufficient to create an immunogenic epitope.    The assumption that N -glycans or parts of these structures can not only represent antigenic, but also allergenic epitopes was confirmed by Tretter, Altmann, Kubelka, März, and Becker (1993) ; in the case of bee-venom allergic patients, the reactivity of IgE antibodies to glycopeptides of phospholipase A2  was demonstrated; the proximal α1,3-fucose residue was identified as the IgE-reactive determinant. The involvement of carbohydrate structures in food allergies is presently discussed quite controversial. However, there is increasing evidence that certain carbohydrates, especially N -glycans, might play a role in these adverse food reactions (Aalberse, Koshte, & Clemens, 1981) , deduced from the following observations: many proteins which are of allergological importance are glycosylated; many allergic individuals show hypersensitivity to various types of allergens which are not taxonomically related, thus suggesting common, ubiquitous structures as glycans; and finally, many pollen allergic patients are also sensitive to certain food stuffs, which also implies common structural epitopes (Möller et al., 1997) . In immunological investigations, mostly indirect methods are applied which shall prove the involvement of glycans in allergic reactions, such as deglycosylation, lectin binding and compositional analysis (Petersen, Becker, Moll, Blümke, & Schlaak, 1995; Batanero, Villalba, Monsalve, & Rodriguez, 1996; Tsuji et al., 1997) ; however, structural information is a prerequisite for making correct conclusions about the allergenicity of N -glycans or epitopes, respectively. We report here on the structural elucidation of the N -linked oligosaccharides in tomato fruit, which shall help to understand some observed cross-reactivities reported recently by Petersen, Vieths, Aulepp, Schlaak, and Becker (1996) .  2 Results 2.1 Preparation of N -glycans from tomato fruit To isolate the protein fraction from tomato fruit, two procedures were carried out alternatively: on the one hand, the tomatoes were homogenized in an appropriate extraction buffer and the proteins were precipitated by addition of ammonium sulfate. On the other hand, a low-temperature acetone powder method, first described by Clements (1965) , was employed; the proteins precipitated in acetone, whereas small hydrophobic compounds (flavonoids, carotinoids) as well as most of the salts were effectively removed; the proteins were extracted from the resulting powder, yielding concentrations of 180–310 μg/ml as determined according to Bradford (1976) ; these values are in the same order of magnitude with those reported by Vieths, Schöning, Brockmann, and Aulepp (1992) , who used this procedure for the preparation of several fruit and vegetable extracts. A cation-exchange chromatography eliminated most of the by-products in the sample. The binding fraction was assayed for the amount of N -acetylglucosamine by OPA-aminosugar analysis, yielding 170–260 nmol GlcNAc, dependent on the sample. From these values it could be deduced that about 85–130 nmol of N -glycans are present in the glycopeptide fractions (assuming 2 moles of GlcNAc/mol of oligosaccharide). The oligosaccharides were released from the glycopeptides using N -glycosidase A, separated from peptides and residual glycopeptides by reverse-phase chromatography and derivatized with the fluorescent tag 2-aminopyridine.  2.2 Separation and structural elucidation of the N -linked oligosaccharides The pyridylaminated oligosaccharides were first size-fractionated on MicroPak AX-5 (Fig. 1  Fig. 1 A); 11 fractions were manually collected and rechromatographed if necessary. Individual fractions were subjected to reverse-phase HPLC, yielding a total of sixteen subfractions (additionally, an aliquot of the total glycan pool was applied to the reverse-phase system, see Fig. 1 B). The elution position of each isolated oligosaccharides was determined on both columns and compared to those from reference oligosaccharides. The individual peaks were then subjected to exoglycosidase treatment using α-mannosidase, β-N -acetylhexosaminidase and endoglycosidase H. The digests were again chromatographed on reverse-phase and MicroPak to monitor the change in the elution behavior ( Tables 1 and 2  ). Whenever possible, a tentatively identified peak was coinjected with the corresponding reference oligosaccharide to verify the identical elution behavior. In the following, the structural assignment of each peak is described; the proposed structures are depicted in Table 3  .  2.3 Complex and truncated complex glycans The retention data of oligosaccharide 1-A, a minor component present in all the tomato samples, did not fit with any of the available reference compounds. However, the glycan exhibited resistance to α-mannosidase treatment. The identity could be presumed from complete digestion of MMF3  from phospholipase A2  with α-mannosidase, resulting in a peak with the same retention behavior as oligosaccharide 1-A on both columns. 1-A is therefore presumed to be 00F3  . Oligosaccharide 1-B  also was resistant to α-mannosidase. Together with its size and having the same retention time on reverse-phase HPLC as the product of α-mannosidase digestion of the major structure of horseradish peroxidase (MMXF3 ), 1-B was deduced to be 00XF3  . The third peak present in the first MicroPak fraction, 1-C , showed a remarkably high retention time on reverse-phase (11.0 glucose units) and sensitivity to α-mannosidase, resulting in a reduction of the retention time to 8.5 glucose units. This corresponds to the retention time of completely digested MMX from zucchini ascorbate–oxidase (Altmann, 1998) . Coelution of the limited digestion product from the reference oligosaccharide with 1-C yields a single, homogenous peak as calculated from addition of the peak areas; 1-C was therefore found to be M0X . Peak 2 from MicroPak gave a single peak on reverse-phase, which was sensitive to α-mannosidase; two peaks, lacking one and two mannose residues as deduced from the retention behavior on MicroPak HPLC, were obtained. The second peak on the size fractionation column exhibited the same retention time as fraction 1 of phospholipase A2 . Therefore, the structure of peak 2 was assumed to be MM . This was confirmed by coinjection of MM (prepared from bovine fibrin), resulting in a single peak. Furthermore, the α-mannosidase digest of fibrin MM behaved exactly the same way as the digest of peak 2 on both HPLC columns. Oligosaccharide 3-A  exhibited the same elution behavior in both HPLC systems as the reference oligosaccharide from pineapple stem bromelain, M0XF3  . α-mannosidase digestion of 3-A resulted in a single peak, which coeluted with compound 1-B (5.2 glucose units on reverse-phase HPLC). Peak 3-B  was identified based on its size and retention times before and after α-mannosidase digestions in comparison with the standard MMX from fraction 1 of ascorbate oxidase. Partial digestion with α-mannosidase resulted in a peak which coeluted with compound 1-C. The final proof of peak identity was again provided by coinjection of the MMX  reference compound. Peak 4, which appeared to be non-homogenous on MicroPak eluted as one major peak (>85%) on the reverse-phase column. The minor components (at least five peaks) were present in minute quantities and could not be analyzed further. The major peak was subjected to α-mannosidase digestion, yielding two signals on reverse-phase HPLC with retention times of 5.1 and 4.4 glucose units, thus indicating the presence of two mannose residues in the structure. The first peak on reverse-phase coeluted with compound 1-A, thus indicating peak 4 to represent MMF3  . This assumption could be proved by (i) coinjection of phospholipase A2 -compound 5A (MMF3 ), resulting in a single peak and (ii) by digesting the reference compound with α-mannosidase, yielding the same two degradation products as for peak 4. The major oligosaccharide (5) in all the samples, representing 47–59% of the total N -glycan amount, was shown to be susceptible to α-mannosidase digestion, resulting in two peaks: the first eluted at retention times identical to those from oligosaccharide 3-A and the M0XF3  reference compound, the second coeluted with oligosaccharide 1-B, already being elucidated as 00XF3 . Furthermore, additional evidence for the peak being MMXF3   was obtained from coinjection of the reference oligosaccharide from horseradish peroxidase, yielding a single peak. Fraction 6 from MicroPak gave two peaks on the reverse-phase column with relative retention times of 4.7 and 5.8 glucose units, respectively. These peaks were digestible by β-N -acetyl-hexosaminidase to a common new compound, exhibiting the same elution behavior as compound 5. Furthermore, hornbeam GnGnXF3  digestion with the same enzyme resulted in formation of the two peaks mentioned above. Again, the final proof, that the two peaks represent MGnXF3   and GnMXF3   was accomplished by coinjection of the corresponding oligosaccharides obtained from limited β-N -acetylglucosaminidase digestion of hornbeam pollen GnGnXF3 . Oligosaccharide 8 also gave one major peak on reverse-phase HPLC. An initial hexosaminidase digestion resulted in the presence of the peaks with 4.8 and 5.8 glucose units on reverse-phase, thus presumably representing the above mentioned components MGnXF3  and GnMXF3 . Complete digestion with β-N -acetyl-hexosaminidase yielded a single peak, coeluting with compound 5 and the reference compound MMXF3 . Hence, oligosaccharide 8 can be designated to be GnGnXF3  .  2.4 Oligomannosidic glycans From the relative retention times on MicroPak of 7.7, 8.7, 9.7 and 10.6 glucose units, oligomannosidic glycans were predicted. This surmise was verified by performing α-mannosidase digestions of these compounds: each fraction was accessible to α-mannosidase, resulting in the same two peaks (exhibiting relative retention times of 3.7/8.7 and 2.9/7.2 glucose units on MicroPak and Hypersil ODS, respectively; Table 1 ) for all four fractions. The assumption of these peaks being Manα1–6Manβ1–4GlcNAcβ1–4GlcNAc–pyridylamine and Manβ1–4GlcNAcβ1–4GlcNAc–pyridylamine was confirmed by a limited α-mannosidase digest of MM, which yielded the same two peaks. Furthermore, endoglycosidase H-digests of the peaks 7 and 9–11 resulted in the formation of pyridylamino–GlcNAc (3.5 glucose units on reverse-phase column), also proving the presence of oligomannosidic structures. Additionally, the authentic oligosaccharides from soybean 7S -glycoprotein were used to confirm the identities of the four above-mentioned peaks. Coelution of peaks 7, 9 and 10 was observed with the corresponding reference compounds Man6 GlcNAc2 –Man8 GlcNAc2 . Peak 9 consisted of two structural isomers (M7.1  and M7.2 ), occurring in relative amounts of 45 and 55% (for sample NotAP2 ( Table 4 )), respectively. Man8 GlcNAc2  is a homogenous peak on reverse-phase (4.7 GcU), which can be therefore assigned to be the M8.1 -isomer. The elution behavior of peak 11 corresponds to published data (Tomiya et al., 1991 ; Kubelka, Altmann, Kornfeld, & März, 1994) and can therefore assigned to be the Man9 -isomer M9.1 . Additional confirmation of the results was obtained by MALDI–TOF analysis of individual HPLC fractions. Fig. 2  Fig. 2  shows the mass spectrum of fraction 5, identified as MMXF3 ;  Table 5  summarizes the results, which corroborate the assignments based upon two-dimensional mapping.  2.5 Analysis of tomatoes from two varieties. Analysis of red and green tomatoes Red Notoro-type tomatoes were subjected to the two different isolation procedures in order to monitor the impact of sample preparation on the glycan pattern in terms of quality and quantity. Furthermore, red and green San Marzano-type fruits were analyzed to distinguish differences in the glycan pattern due to the variety and the stage of ripening, respectively. Table 4  shows the condensed results in terms of relative abundances of individual fractions on the total N -glycan amounts. It could be demonstrated that irrespective of the preparation method very similar results were obtained; San Marzano-type tomatoes contain the same sixteen structures and also the relative quantities were rather similar in the examined varieties. Interestingly, also the state of ripening does not seem to have a significant impact on the appearance of the glycan pattern in terms of quality and quantity although it has to be stated that more samples have to be analyzed for a statistical interpretation.   3 Discussion The N -glycans of tomato fruit were structurally elucidated, thereby comparing two varieties as well as two stages of ripening. The low protein content of tomatoes and the high amount of free sugars and polysaccharides (Seymour, Colquhoun, DuPont, Parsely, & Selvendran, 1990; York, Kumar Kolli, Orlando, Albersheim, & Darvill, 1997)  complicated the effective isolation of the protein fraction. However, the employed low-temperature acetone powder method proved to be very efficient for this application: several by-products are effectively removed, the resulting powder can be stored for several months at −20°C and, although not of relevance in the present study, protein denaturation is minimized due to the extremely low temperature during isolation, yielding extracts of high immunochemical activity (Vieths, Schöning, & Baltes, 1992) . In the further sample preparation, two steps shall be briefly addressed: borohydride reduction, which was employed in order to prevent residual free sugars from subsequent derivatization which proved its necessity in the case of grass pollen extracts where several artefactic peaks appeared on the chromatogramms without this step (F. Altmann, personal communication). Second, N -glycosidase A from almonds was used for the deglycosylation of the glycopeptides, which is important, since the (more) frequently used N -glycosidase F from Flavobacterium meningosepticum  cannot cleave glycans containing fucose linked α1–3 to Asn–GlcNAc (Tretter, Altmann, & März, 1991; Altmann, Schweiszer, & Weber, 1995) . The methodology for the structural characterization, using two-dimensional HPLC in combination with exoglycosidase digestions, was first introduced by Tomiya et al. (1988)  and has been employed for glycoprotein–glycans from various sources (Takahashi et al., 1986; Kubelka et al., 1994; Ohsuga et al., 1996) . Complex-type structures, most of them truncated and exhibiting α1–3 linked fucose and/or β1–2 linked xylose, as well as oligomannosidic glycans were detected. Most of these structures have been reported to occur in other plant glycoproteins; MMXF3 , addressed to be the typical vacuole-type plant N -glycan (Sturm, 1995)  and the most abundant oligosaccharide in tomato fruit, has also been found in horseradish peroxidase (Kurosaka et al., 1991) , a protease inhibitor from barbados pride (Caesalpinia Pulcherrima  Sw.) seeds (Hase et al., 1986) , Sophora japonica  lectin (Fournet et al., 1987)  and ricin D from the seeds of castor plants (Ricinus communis ) (Kimura et al., 1988) . M0XF3 , another structure which occurs in relatively high amounts in tomato (17–22%), has been reported for both pineapple stem bromelain (Van Kuik et al., 1986)  and barley peroxidase (Johannson, Rasmussen, Harthill, & Welinder, 1992) . Small α1,3-fucosylated and/or β1,2-xylosylated glycans that are minor fractions in tomato, have recently also been found in other plants; MMX was found to be the most abundant N -glycan in rice α-amylase from germinated seedlings (Hayashi et al., 1990)  and also represents the complex oligosaccharide side chain of the bean storage protein phaseolin (Sturm, van Kuik, Vliegenthart, & Chrispeels, 1987). M0X accounts for 15% of the N -glycans of barley(1–3,1–4)-β-d -glucan 4-glucanohydrolase isoenzyme EII (Harthill, & Thomsen, 1995) , whereas MMF3  was found to be a minor fraction of soybean peroxidase (Gray, Yun Yang, Hull, Venzke, & Montgomery, 1996) . Three structures that exhibit outer-arm GlcNAc residues and represent 6–14% of the N -glycans in tomato fruit, have been previously reported for lactase from sycamore cells (Harthill, & Thomsen, 1995) . GnMXF3  and MGnXF3  were also found to be present in red kidney bean Fe(III)–Zn(II) purple acid phosphatase (Stahl et al., 1994) . Oligomannosidic structures, accounting for only 3–9% of the N -glycans in tomato fruit, are wide-spread among plants (e.g. soybean agglutinin (Dorland, van Halbeek, Vliegenthart, Lis, & Sharon, 1981) , phaseolin of the common bean (Sturm et al., 1987) , rice α-amylase (Hayashi et al., 1990) , α-amylase inhibitor from white kidney bean (Phasolus vulgaris) (Yamaguchi, Funaoka, & Iwamoto, 1992) , but are also found in insect, yeast and mammalian glycoproteins. α-1,3-Fucosylation of the innermost N -acetylglucosamine residue, a typical feature of N -glycans from plants but also from insects, was found in 8 of the 16 tomato N -linked oligosaccharides, accounting for 86–90% of the N -glycan pool in tomato fruits. Such fucosyl residues as well as β1,2-linked xylosyl residues are not present in mammalian glycoproteins and therefore render plant glycoproteins immunogenic (Wilson et al., 1998) . In fact, even IgE antibodies may be directed against this epitope. Owing to their widespread occurrence, α1,3-fucosylated N -glycans (with or without xylose) constitute a highly cross-reactive carbohydrate determinant detected in a wide variety of plant as well as insect allergens (Tretter et al., 1993; Garcia-Casado et al., 1996; Jankiewicz, Aulepp, Altmann, Foetisch, & Vieths, 1998) . As far as tomatoes are concerned, Petersen et al. (1996)  reported the reactivity of IgE antibodies of grass pollen allergic individuals to tomato extracts. Lectin blotting of proteins and ELISA inhibition experiments using glycopeptides of known glycan structures suggested the presence of carbohydrate IgE epitopes with an α1,3-fucose residue. The characterization of the tomato N -glycans presented in this work, revealing a high degree of α1,3-fucosylated structures in the fruit, offers the structural explanation for these findings.  4 Experimental 4.1 Materials Red tomatoes (variety Notoro) were bought in a retail shop; red and green tomatoes (variety San Marzano) were obtained from RIKILT-DLO, Netherlands. N -glycosidase A from almonds and endoglycosidase H from Streptomyces plicatus  were purchased from Boehringer Mannheim. β-N -acetylglucosaminidase (jack bean), α-mannosidase (jack bean) and pepsin (from porcine stomach mucosa) were obtained from Sigma. 2-aminopyridine, sodium cyanoborohydride, dithioerythritol, benzamidine and PMSF were obtained from Sigma.  4.2 Precipitation of proteins using a low-temperature acetone powder method The extracts were prepared in a similar manner to that described by Vieths, Schöning, and Petersen (1994) : 200 g of tomato fruit were homogenized in 400 ml of ice-cold acetone on dry ice. Another 400 ml of ice-cold acetone were added and the sample was kept on dry ice overnight with occasional stirring during the first few hours. The resulting precipitate was filtered through sintered glass and washed twice with acetone and once with acetone/diethylether (1:1, v/v) at −20°C. The sediment was lyophilized. 4 g of acetone powder were taken up in 150 ml phosphate buffered saline (10 mM phosphate pH 7.4; 0.15 M NaCl) and stirred at 4°C for 60 min. After centrifugation (20000 rpm, 20 min, 0°C), the supernatant was filtered (0.45 μm), extensively dialyzed against double-distilled water (membrane 3.5 kD cut-off) overnight and lyophilized.  4.3 Ammonium sulfate precipitation As an alternative to the above-mentioned procedure, ammonium sulfate precipitation was per-formed: to 200 g of tomato fruit 400 ml of extraction buffer (10 mM phosphate pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM benzamidine, 1 mM DTE, 0.1 mM PMSF) was added and the sample was homogenized. Centrifugation was carried out at 20000 rpm (20 min, 4°C). Solid ammonium sulfate was added to the supernatant to a final concentration of 80% saturation. The mixture was stirred at 4°C for 3 h, centrifuged (20000 rpm, 20 min, 4°C) and the pellet was dialyzed against double-distilled water and lyophilized.  4.4 Purification of N -glycans The lyophilisate was dissolved in 5% v/v formic acid and digested with pepsin (2%, w/w) for 48 h at 37°C. (Another 1% w/w pepsin was added after 24 h). After centrifugation (10000 rpm, 10 min), the supernatant was adjusted to pH 2.5 and chromatographed on an ion-exchange SP650-M column, 1×5 cm (Toso Haas), equilibrated with 5% acetic acid. After application of the sample, the column was rinsed with 40 ml 5% acetic acid. The glycopeptide fraction was eluted with 1 M ammonia (collection of 2 ml fractions). Carbohydrate-positive fractions, detected using the orcinol–sulfuric acid reagent according to Winzler (1955) , were pooled and lyophilized. The sample was taken up in 1 ml water; the pH was adjusted to 9 with ammonia. 100 μl of a 2% w/v sodium borohydride solution was added and the sample was incubated at room temperature overnight. After addition of acetic acid and evaporation, this step was repeated twice with 1% v/v acetic acid in methanol and twice with MeOH. The sample was dissolved in 100 μl citrate/phosphate pH 5.0 and digested with 0.5 mU of N -glycosidase A for 37°C for 48 h. Oligosaccharides were separated from residual glycopeptides and peptides using a reverse-phase cartridge as described by Dell et al. (Dell et al., 1993) . The glycans were labelled with 2-aminopyridine according to Hase, Ibuki, and Ikenaka (1984) . To remove the excess of reagent, a gelfiltration step was performed using a 1×40 cm Sephadex G15 column, equilibrated with 1% w/v acetic acid.  4.5 Fractionation of pyridylaminated oligosaccharides by two-dimensional HPLC A Shimadzu module system, consisting of a system controller, a pump and a fluorescence detector was used. Separations of the pyridylamino-oligosaccharides using two different HPLC columns were performed at room temperature. Glucose oligomers were used in both systems for calibration and as internal standards. Elution volumes of the samples were expressed in glucose units according to Lee, Lee, Tomiya, and Takahashi (1990) . Fractionation according to size was accomplished on a MicroPak AX-5 column (4×300 mm, VARIAN); the eluents were as follows: (A) 3% w/v acetic acid, triethylamine pH 7.3: acetonitrile 35:65, v/v and (B) 3% w/v acetic acid, triethylamine pH 7.3: acetonitrile 50:50, v/v. A linear gradient of 0–60%B in 30 min at a flow rate of 1 ml/min was applied. Further separation was achieved by reverse-phase HPLC on a 5 μm hypersil ODS column (Shandon). The column was equilibrated with 0.1 M ammonium acetate pH 4.0 and eluted with a linear gradient of 0–7.5% (by vol.) methanol in 25 min at a flow rate of 1.5 ml/min. In both systems, pyridylaminated oligosaccharides were detected by fluorescence using excitation and emission wavelengths of 320 and 400 nm, respectively.  4.6 Exoglycosidase digestions Generally, about 50–100 pmol of oligosaccharide were incubated for 20 h at 37°C. The following buffers and enzyme quantities were used: 50 mU α-mannosidase in 50 mM sodium acetate, pH 4.2 containing 0.1 mM ZnCl2  to achieve complete removal of α-linked mannose residues; 5 mU of α-mannosidase to selectively remove α1,3-linked mannose residues; 2 mU β-N -acetylhexosaminidase (for partial hydrolysis) or 10 mU of the enzyme for complete hydrolysis, using 0.1 M sodium citrate, pH 5.0; 1 mU endoglycosidase H in 0.1 M sodium citrate/phosphate, pH 5.0.  4.7 Preparation of reference oligosaccharides Pyridylaminated oligosaccharides used as reference substances were prepared from the following sources: Manα1–6(Manα1–3)Manβ1–4GlcNAcβ1–4GlcNAc (MM) from bovine fibrin (Staudacher, Kubelka, & März, 1992) ; Manα1–6(Manα1–3)(Xylβ1–2)Manβ1–4GlcNAcβ1–4GlcNAc (MMX) from zucchini ascorbate oxidase (Altmann, 1998) ; Manα1–6(Manα1–3)Manβ1–4GlcNAcβ1–4(Fucα1–3)GlcNAc (MMF3 ) from honeybee venom phospholipase A2 (Kubelka et al., 1993) ; Manα1–6(Xylβ1–2)Manβ1–4GlcNAcβ1–4(Fucα1–3)GlcNAc (M0XF3 ) from pineapple stem bromelain (Van Kuik et al., 1986) ; Manα1–6(Manα1–3)(Xylβ1–2)Manβ1–4GlcNAcβ1–4(Fucα1–3)GlcNAc (MMXF3 ) from horseradish peroxidase (Kurosaka et al., 1991) ; GlcNAcβ1–2Manα1–6(GlcNAcβ1–2Manα1–3)(Xylβ1–2)Manβ1–4GlcNAcβ1–4(Fucα1–3)GlcNAc (GnGnXF3 ) from hornbeam pollen (Wilson, & Altmann, 1998) ; Man6 GlcNAc2  [M6.1]1 Codes for oligomannose structures according to Tomiya et al. (1991) .  1  , Man7 GlcNAc2  [M7.1]1  , [M7.2]1  , and Man8 GlcNAc2  [M8.1]1   from soybean 7S -glycoprotein (Neeser, Vedovo, Mutsaers, & Vliegenthart, 1985) . The structures of the reference oligosaccharides were confirmed by methylation analysis (data not shown). For column calibration, pyridylaminated isomaltooligosaccharides were prepared from partially hydrolyzed dextran.  4.8 Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization – time of flight – mass spectrometry MALDI–TOF–MS data was obtained using a Dynamo instrument (Thermo Bioanalysis, UK), operating in the positiv-ion linear mode. About 5–10 pmol of pyridylaminated tomato N -glycans (individual reverse-phase HPLC fractions) were repeatedly dried under nitrogen to remove buffer components; the samples were finally dissolved in 6 μl water and 3 μl matrix solution (2% 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid in water containing 30% acetonitrile and 0,5 mM NaCl). Aliquots of 1 μl were applied on the target and allowed to dry. Mass spectra were obtained by averaging 20 single spectra. External mass calibration was performed with pyridylaminated GlcNAc2 Man3 GlcNAc2  (MNa+ =1418,2 Da) which was prepared from bovine fibrin as described (Altmann, Schwihla, Staudacher, Glössl, & März, 1995) .  4.9 HPLC-analysis of OPA-aminosugars An aliquot of the glycopeptide fraction was hydrolyzed with 4 M TFA and aminosugar analysis by reverse-phase chromatography was performed as described by Altmann (1992) .    Acknowledgements We thank Hubert Noteborn, RILILT-DLO for supplying us with the tomato samples and Thomas Dalik for performing the aminosugar analyses. This work was financed by the EU-project AIR3-CT94-2311.   
