 2-Nitrofluorene (NF) is an air pollutant which has been used as a model substance of nitrated polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (nitro-PAHs) [1, 2] . NF enters in vivo into an oxidative or a reductive metabolic pathway, depending on the route of administration [3–5] . Oral administration results mainly in reduced metabolites [5] , e.g., 2-aminofluorene (AF) and 2-acetylaminofluorene (AAF), both are carcinogens. It is reported that NF induces DNA adduct formation in vivo with dG-C8-AF as one of the characterized DNA adducts [6, 7] . dG-C8-AF, together with other known AF- and AAF-related DNA adducts (i.e., dG-C8-AAF, dG-N 2 -AAF, etc.) have been suspected to be pre-mutagenic or toxic [8] . Carcinogens have been shown to induce DNA adducts [6, 7, 9, 10] . Exposures of human populations to complex mixtures with known or suspected risk of inducing cancer is also associated with formation of DNA adducts [11–13] . High levels of DNA adducts in normal human colonic mucosa is significantly associated with colorectal cancer [14] . In polluted areas, the seasonal change of DNA adducts in human lymphocytes varies with the seasonal changes of air pollutants [15] . Thus, DNA adducts may be used as biomarkers for genotoxic risk. DNA adducts have different stabilities owing to factors such as DNA repair and chemical instability. No uniform correlation is found between adduct persistence and tumor induction. However, it is postulated that the persistent DNA adducts represent dormant lesions that may become fixed as mutations long after exposure to the carcinogen and contribute to the malignant transformation as a result of cell division [16] . Measurement of DNA adducts from carcinogenic alkenylbenzenes in preweanling male B6C3F1 mice suggests the virtual absence of DNA repair for these adducts [17] . This has been postulated to play a role in the carcinogenicity of safrole and related alkenylbenzenes in newborn mice [17–20] . Further experiments show that rapid repair of O 6 -methylguanine-DNA adducts protects transgenic mice from N -methylnitrosourea-induced thymic lymphomas [21] . It has also been reported that increased platinum removal from total genomic DNA was associated with increased cisplatin resistance in human ovarian cancer cell lines [22] . A recently published long-term tumor study on Wistar rats showed that NF induces tumors in the liver, kidney and forestomach. DNA adducts are formed at higher levels during the early stage of NF administration in these tumor-target organs compared with some non-tumor target organs (heart, spleen and glandular stomach) [23] . However, NF and also a lot of other carcinogens induce DNA adducts in both tumor-target and non-tumor target tissues. It is thus of significance to know the biochemical characteristics and mutagenic effects of the individual DNA adduct induced by carcinogens. Better correlation may be achieved when an individual DNA adduct is compared with tumor formation. The aim of the present study was to investigate the formation and persistence and the characterization of DNA adducts during and after a long-term administration of NF.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Animal experiment Male Wistar rats from Möllegaard Breeding Center (Skensved, Denmark) with a body weight of approximately 90 g, were used for the experiment. The rats were housed in wire-bottomed cages under standardized conditions of light (12 h light and dark cycle), humidity (55–60%) and temperature (21±1°C). The rats were acclimatized for 1 week before the start of the experiment. During the entire experiment, the rats had access to food and water ad libitum. The rats were randomly divided into four groups. Three groups were fed diets supplemented with different concentrations of NF which were 0.24 mmol (LD=low dose), 0.95 mmol (MD=medium dose) and 2.37 mmol (HD=high dose) per kg diet, respectively. One group was fed basal diet (R3, Ewos, Södertälje, Sweden) as a control group. The rats were fed NF-supplemented diets continuously for 11 months, thereafter, all groups were fed basal diet for a further 13 months. The tumor results of this study were previously reported [23] . In the present study, DNA adducts were not detected in the LD group. Different tissues, i.e., liver, kidney, forestomach, glandular stomach and spleen, were collected for DNA adduct analysis. The early stage DNA adduct levels were obtained from three rats after 10 days of HD NF administration. The later stage DNA adduct analysis was focused on the samples which were obtained from three rats that were killed shortly before the cessation of the HD NF diet (11 months). The persistence of DNA adduct levels in the liver after the termination of NF administration was monitored in the MD group.  2.2 DNA adduct analyses Tissues from the rat were homogenized in a buffer of 1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA and 10 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.4) while kept cold on an ice bed. After RNAse and proteinase K digestion, DNA was extracted by the phenol and chloroform and then hydrolyzed by micrococcal nuclease and spleen phosphodiesterase. DNA adducts were enriched by butanol extraction in the presence of tetrabutylammonium chloride. DNA adducts were then labeled with [γ-32 P  ]ATP by polynucleotide kinase. The method used was originally from Beach and Gupta [24] with small modifications in different steps [25, 26] . 32 P  -HPLC-analyses of postlabeled DNA adducts were performed by injecting the total unrefined 32 P  -labeling mixture into the 32 P  -HPLC. In each analysis, 2.8 μg of DNA (5 μCi) was injected. A DeltaPak™ 5 μm C18–100 Å column, with a 0.5 ml/min flow rate of 2 M ammonium formate, 0.4 M formic acid (pH 4.5) with a linear gradient of 0–35% acetonitrile (0–70 min) was used for the separation of phosphorylated nucleotides and adducts. The 32 P  -HPLC method for analyses of postlabeled DNA adducts is described in detail elsewhere [25, 26] .  2.3 Detection of NF-DNA adducts after different enrichment procedures Butanol extraction and nuclease P1 (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) treatment were run in parallel for the comparison of enrichment efficiency of the NF-DNA adducts. Liver samples were collected from rats receiving 11 months of HD NF feeding. In the nuclease P1 enrichment procedure, normal nucleotides were dephosphorylated by 40 min 37°C incubation with nuclease P1 (in 1 mM ZnCI2 ) in 1 μg/μg DNA level. The hydrolysates were thereafter evaporated to dryness and redissolved in water for 32 P  -labeling as described above.  2.4 Identification of NF-DNA adducts DNA adducts formed in the liver after 11-month HD NF administration were co-chromatographed with DNA adduct standards: dGp-C8-AF, dGp-C8-AAF and dGp-N 2 -AAF (Fig. 1  ). The DNA adduct standards were kindly supplied by Dr. F.A. Beland, National Center for Toxicological Research, Jefferson, AR, USA.   3 Results Four DNA adducts (DNA adduct A, B, C and D) were found in rat tissues after 10 days as well as 11 months of HD NF feeding. Fig. 2   shows representative 32 P  -HPLC chromatograms of DNA adducts formed in the liver, kidney and spleen after 10 days (Fig. 2 a–c) and 11 months (Fig. 2 d–f) of HD NF feeding. DNA adducts A and B increased dramatically in the liver and kidney during the period of NF administration. Adducts C and D showed less marked changes over time. Fig. 3   shows representative chromatograms of DNA adducts formed in forestomach and glandular stomach after 10 days of HD NF administration. A dramatic difference was seen between these two tissues regarding DNA adduct levels which was mainly caused by high DNA adduct D level in the forestomach. DNA adducts A and C were not detectable either in the forestomach or the glandular stomach. Fig. 4   displays the DNA adduct levels in different tissues after 10 days (upper) and 11 months (lower) of HD NF feeding, respectively. After 10 days of NF feeding, the levels of DNA adducts A, B and C were much lower compared to 11 months of NF feeding. Adduct D, which was a major DNA adduct especially in the liver at early stage (10 days) of NF feeding, did not increase significantly over time (10 days to 11 months). Adducts A and B, on the other hand, increased dramatically during the NF feeding and consequently, became dominant adducts in the liver and kidney after 11 months of NF feeding. Compared to the liver and kidney, spleen showed a different adduct pattern in which adduct A was not detectable. Fig. 5   shows the DNA adduct levels formed in the forestomach and glandular stomach after 10 days of HD NF feeding. A significant difference was seen with respect to the level of adduct D in these two tissues. DNA adducts A and C were not found in these tissues. To characterize the four major DNA adducts induced by NF, 32 P  -HPLC co-chromatography was performed. DNA adduct D co-migrated with dG-C8-AF and DNA adduct C co-migrated with dG-N 2 -AAF. Neither DNA adduct A nor B co-migrated with any of the three adduct standards (Fig. 6  ). Higher levels of DNA adduct A and C were detected after nuclease P1 treatment compared to the butanol extraction. On the other hand, DNA adducts B and D were not detectable after nuclease P1 treatment (Fig. 7  ). The decline of total NF-DNA adducts in the rat liver after the withdrawal of MD NF administration showed a biphasic manner (Fig. 8  ). The pattern of DNA adduct removal for different DNA adducts varied. Adducts B and D showed a sharp drop 1 month after the withdrawal of NF feeding. DNA adduct D, in the later stage of the period, reached an undetectable level. On the other hand, DNA adducts A and C showed a slow decline. DNA adduct A maintained a high level after 11 months on the basal diet (Fig. 8 ).  4 Discussion A long-term NF feeding to rats induces tumors in the liver, kidney and forestomach [23] . Both DNA adduct levels and tumor formation showed a dose-dependent manner [23] . DNA adduct levels after short-term (days) NF administration were associated with the locations of tumors up to 2 years later [23] . In the present experiment, four major DNA adducts, named as DNA adduct A, B, C and D, were found in the liver and kidney after 10 days and 11 months of NF feeding. The levels of different NF-DNA adducts increased with varied rates during the period of NF feeding. In one of the non-tumor target tissues, spleen, adducts B, C, and D were detected at low levels after short- or long-term of NF feeding. Glandular stomach, as another non-tumor target tissue, showed only low levels of DNA adducts B and D after 10 days of NF feeding. DNA adduct formation in forestomach after 11-month NF administration could not be analysed since multiple tumors which generally covered the forestomach membrane were formed in this tissue in almost all the NF-dosed rats (HD, MD and LD group). At the early stage, DNA adduct D, which co-migrated with dG-C8-AF, constituted a large part of total NF-DNA adducts, especially in the liver. At the later stage of NF feeding, DNA adducts A and B increased, becoming the major part of total DNA adducts, while DNA adduct D (dG-C8-AF) did not increase significantly compared to the level at the early stage. Expressed as a percentage of total DNA adducts, DNA adduct D (dG-C8-AF) decreased from 42 (10-day NF administration) to 10% of total DNA adducts (11-month NF administration) in the liver during the feeding period. The rat stomach consists of two parts, i.e., the forestomach and the glandular stomach. A dramatically higher DNA adduct level was detected in the forestomach, corresponding to the high tumor incidence in this tissue, compared to the level of DNA adducts in the glandular stomach, a non-tumor target tissue of NF [23] . In the high dose group, most of the rats grew liver tumors while they were still on NF diet or not long after the termination of NF diet. Samples were unable to be collected for certain period after the termination of NF diet. MD group of rats grew tumors in a scattered time points generally after the termination of NF diet. Liver samples from the MD group were therefore chosen for the study of DNA adduct persistence. The use of mature rats minimizes the significance of DNA adduct dilution through cell proliferation in the liver. The early rapid diminution of DNA adducts followed by a slower rate of elimination was seen for adducts B and D (but not for adducts A and C). The biphasic removal is consistent with what observed in rat tissues after in vivo administration of substances that form bulky adducts [16, 27–30] . The two-step removal process may be attributed to the heterogeneity in efficiency of DNA repair, with adducts in some genomic regions being more accessible to DNA repair than these in others [31, 32] . Among the four major DNA adducts induced by NF, adduct D and C co-migrated with dG-C8-AF and dG-N 2 -AAF, respectively. DNA adducts A and B did not co-migrate with any of the adduct standards used. Some characteristics of the four NF-DNA adducts are summarized in Table 1  . For DNA adduct enrichment, generally, butanol extraction is used for aromatic amines-DNA adducts and nuclease P1 is used for PAHs-DNA adducts. The values of DNA adduct A and C were much higher after nuclease P1 treatment compared to that of butanol extraction. On the other hand, DNA adducts B and D were undetectable when the nuclease P1 enrichment procedure was used. DNA adduct A as an unknown major NF adduct may be the same DNA adduct as that described by Wierckx et al. [7] . This DNA adduct could possibly represent an oxidative NF metabolite reacted with DNA, either via a ring epoxide or via a reaction with the hydroxyl group. It was reported that OH-NFs are potent genotoxins with a hydroxy function at position 7 or 9 of NF, while hydroxylization at position 5 makes a detoxification product [33] . DNA adduct B, which was sensitive to nuclease P1 hydrolyzation, could possibly be an arylamine DNA adduct [34, 35] . Another possibility is that DNA adduct B is the bis-phosphate of DNA adduct A. Upon nuclease P1 treatment, DNA adduct B is converted to DNA adduct A. Since DNA adduct levels varied after different enrichment procedures (Fig. 7 ), it is therefore of importance to relate DNA adduct levels to specific enrichment procedures. Culp et al. [36] demonstrates a biphasic removal of DNA adducts in the rat liver after administration of AAF. The present study dealt with NF, which is mainly but not completely metabolized to AF and AAF in rats [2, 3, 5] . Two DNA adducts, i.e., dG-C8-AF and dG-N 2 -AAF, were induced in the rat liver both by NF (present study) and AAF [36] . Although the strain of the rats and length of administration are different between the present study and the AAF study [36] , the persistence of the two common DNA adducts is rather consistent. Three out of the four NF-DNA adducts were still detectable in rat liver after the rats were on basal diet for 11 months. The long persistence of NF-DNA adducts may increase their chances to be fixed as mutations. In conclusion, the air pollutant NF induces mainly four DNA adducts. Two DNA adducts, i.e., adducts C and D, are characterized as dG-N 2 -AAF and dG-C8-AF, respectively. DNA adducts A and B, with structures unknown, are the major NF-DNA adducts after 11 months of NF feeding. NF-DNA adducts persist long after the withdrawal of NF, especially DNA adducts A and C which are repaired only to a minor extent over a period that corresponds to approximately half the life time of the rats. Three out of the four NF-DNA adducts are still detectable in the rat liver 11 months after the withdrawal of NF feeding. Further characterization of individual NF-DNA adducts may help to elucidate the mechanism of NF-induced carcinogenesis.   Acknowledgements The authors wish to express their gratitude to Mary-Ann Zetterqvist for skillful technical assistance. This study was supported by grants from Swedish Environmental Protection Agency and Swedish Cancer Society.   
