 Inborn errors of metabolism can in many cases be identified by the presence of abnormal metabolites in the urine. These compounds are either not present or are present in only very small concentrations in the urine of normal individuals. Many organic acidemias show similar clinical manifestations and a definitive diagnosis can only be made by identification of the abnormal metabolites. The method generally applied is capillary gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS). One of the drawbacks of this technique is the relatively long time required for sample preparation and analysis. In sick patients it is sometimes desirable to make a diagnosis within a short period of time. To address these needs, we developed a fast solid-phase extraction method for sample preparation and a GC/MS/MS screening method for 14 diagnostic marker compounds. MS/MS or tandem mass spectrometry methods are characterized by high specificity and sensitivity due to the effective exclusion of interfering matrix compounds. While to date, in the majority of analytical applications a tandem-in-space MS approach with triple quadrupole or sector MS/MS instruments is used, we applied a tandem-in-time technique, using a bench-top ion trap. In tandem-in-time instruments, the sequential events of tandem MS, i.e. electron impact ionization of the sample molecules, the mass selection of the precursor ions, the collision-induced dissociation (CID) of the precursor ions with neutral gas molecules, and the mass analysis of the product ions, occur in the same space, the ion trap, and are separated by time [1] . With the introduction of the wave-board technology into bench-top ion trap instruments [2–4] , MS/MS experiments can be performed at relatively low cost. Compared to screening methods using quadrupole GC/MS instruments operated in the selected ion monitoring mode, as described by Tuchman et al. [5]  for the screening of organic acids, the tandem MS approach described here provides increased specificity. With the help of the Saturn Automatic Method Development (AMD) editor, the development and optimization of tandem MS methods is relatively easy. In this paper, we report methods for the sample preparation and GC/MS/MS organic acid screening. We also show examples of how diagnostic marker compounds can be identified.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Instrumentation A Varian 3400/Saturn 2 ion trap GC/MS system (Varian, Walnut Creek, CA), equipped with an MS/MS and SIS (selective ion storage) wave-board, is used. A DB-1 fused-silica capillary column (30 m×0.25 mm×0.25 μm) (Alltech, Deerfield, IL) is used. The column is equilibrated at 60°C, the temperature is increased to 300°C at a rate of 24°C/min. The total run time is 10.0 min. Helium is used as the carrier gas with controlled pressure set at 12.5 psi. Data is collected from 3.40 to 8.50 min. The injector used is a 1078 Universal Capillary Injector (Varian) with 0.34 mm I.D. injector port liner. The injection is splitless with no temperature program. The injector temperature is 300°C. The split valve is closed at 0.01 min and reopened at 0.30 min (split mode, 50:1). A total of 2 μl of the sample is injected. The transfer line is held at 260°C.  2.2 Chemicals The organic acids were obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO) or Aldrich (Milwaukee, WI). The acylglycines were synthesized from glycine and acylanhydrides or acylchlorides as described in [6,7] . N ,O -Bis(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide (BSTFA) with 1% trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS) was obtained from Alltech.  2.3 Solid-phase extraction columns CHEMELUT extraction columns were obtained from Varian (Harbor City, CA). A specially modified form of diatomaceous earth, that provides large surface area between the aqueous and the organic phase, was utilized as the packing material. The extraction columns were conditioned on a vacuum manifold with the vacuum pressure set at 15 mm Hg by sequentially adding 2 ml of 3 N HCl saturated with NaCl, 10 ml of deionized water, 5 ml of methanol, and 5 ml of ethylactate. The columns were then dried for approximately 30 min.  2.4 Sample preparation Urine equivalent to 2.5 μmol creatinine is used. If the calculated urine volume exceeds 2.0 ml, only one-half of the volume is used (internal standard and final volume are also cut into half). If the urine volume is less than 1.0 ml, the volume is brought up to 1.0 ml with deionized water. Fifty μl internal standard 2-ketocaproic acid (1 mg/ml) and 200 μl hydroxylamine hydrochloride (7.5 mg/dl) are added and the sample is incubated at 60°C for 20 min. Five hundred μl of 3 N HCl are added. The sample is vortexed for 1 min and applied to the column. Ten ml ethylacetate is added. Water is removed from the eluate with sodium sulfate, it is dried under a flow of nitrogen at 40°C, derivatized with 50 μl BSTFA+1%TMCS for 10 min at 60°C and the final volume is brought up to 1.0 ml with hexane.  2.5 MS/MS method development The following steps were performed for each analyte:1. In the full scan electron ionization mode, the retention time was determined and the identity of the compound was confirmed by comparison of the full scan electron impact with the library spectra (The MS library used was a gift by Denis C. Lehotay from the Hospital for Sick Children Toronto).  2. The candidate precursor ion, which in most cases was the most abundant ion, was isolated in the ion trap without applying a CID voltage.  3. If the candidate precursor ion could be isolated successfully, the AMD editor was used to determine the required CID voltage for fragmentation by increasing the voltage in 5 or 0.05 V steps for the non-resonant or resonant mode, respectively (Figs. 1 and 2 ). The voltage that gave the highest intensity for the product ions was selected. This was done in the non-resonant mode first. If the fragmentation was not satisfying, the resonant mode was chosen or a different precursor ion was selected.  4. If the fragmentation pattern was satisfying, but the intensity of the product ion spectrum was relatively low, the storage level of the radiofrequency trapping field and the CID voltage were increased to improve ion intensity.  5. A product ion, that was abundant and specific, was selected for analyte detection.      3 Results Fourteen urinary organic acids that are indicative of various inherited metabolic diseases were chosen for the GC/MS/MS screening (Table 1  ). The automatic method development (AMD) is illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2    for 2-ketoisocaproic acid. Fig. 1A–D  shows the product ion spectra at increasing CID voltages. The ion at m /z  200 was chosen as the precursor ion. With increasing CID voltage, the precursor ion signal decreases, while the product ions become more abundant. This is further illustrated in the breakdown curve in Fig. 2 , where the ion intensities of the precursor ion m /z  200 and the most abundant product ion m /z  110 are plotted against the CID voltage. It can be concluded that 0.30 V results in the highest intensity of the product ion m /z  110 and is therefore the optimum voltage to monitor the product ion. The optimum conditions of the CID process for the other analytes were determined analogously. Table 2   lists for each of the fourteen analytes the precursor ion, the product ion that was chosen for the detection, and the determined optimum CID conditions, i.e. the CID mode (non-resonant or resonant excitation), the CID voltage and the excitation storage level. Table 3   shows the determined response factors and the range of linearity. The response factors were measured as the ratio of the intensity of the product ions and the intensity of the peak of the respective analyte in the full scan chromatogram, based on internal standards. The response factors vary widely because of different ionization and fragmentation efficiencies for the analytes. The linearity of the standard curves, tested for over the range from 0.1 to 10 ng/μl, varied between the analytes. For the sample preparation a fast solid-phase extraction that was previously described for the extraction of methylmalonic acid [8]  was chosen. The measured extraction efficiencies for the 14 organic acid markers are between 57% (propionylglycine) and 106% (glutaric acid) (data not shown). When the extraction efficiency of the solid phase extraction was compared using a liquid–liquid extraction two times with 5 ml ethylacetate, the ratios in percent of the area counts after solid phase versus liquid–liquid extraction were between 89 and 145% for the 14 analytes. For all organic acid markers except sebacic acid the solid-phase extraction showed a higher efficiency compared with the liquid–liquid extraction. In order to test the sensitivity and to establish reference values, we determined the areas of the characteristic product ion peaks for each of the 14 analytes in 30 normal urine samples. The samples were run over a period of 3 days. The averages, expressed as the ratio of the area of the analyte over the area of the internal standard, 2-ketocaproic acid, and the standard deviations are listed in Table 4  . All analytes were detected in at least 24 of the 30 samples. Fig. 3   illustrates how elevations in organic acids can be detected. The product ion chromatograms for all 14 analytes in a normal urine sample that was spiked with five organic acids are shown (see legend to Fig. 3 ). The elevations in the five organic acids could all be detected. Table 5   shows the results from nine patients with various known metabolic diseases that were tested. The elevations in the characteristic analytes were easily detectable. The upper limit of the normal range is considered to be the average of the ratios of the area of the analyte over the area of the internal standard in 30 normal controls plus two standard deviations. All analytes that are characteristic for the particular disorder were at least five times higher than the upper limit of the normal range. For the diagnosis of fatty acid oxidation disorders it is necessary to compare the relative quantities of adipic, suberic and sebacic acid. Due to different response factors (see Table 3 ) this can only be done by dividing the areas by the response factor. The results for adipic, suberic and sebacic acid in the last patient in Table 5  are 2.0, 4.2 and 14.6, respectively, and are consistent with dietary medium chain triglycerides.  4 Discussion The GC/MS/MS screening method was developed as a fast and simple method to identify organic acidurias with high sensitivity and specificity in situations where a fast diagnosis is desirable. Fourteen analytes, that are indicative of treatable inborn errors of metabolism (with the exception of fumarase deficiency), were chosen for the screening. The list of analytes could possibly be expanded to screen for other disorders. A GC/MS run in the full scan mode is performed at a later point to confirm the findings of the screening test. The solid-phase extraction method used allows sample preparation within a relatively short time with a good extraction efficiency for all marker compounds. The entire sample preparation including oximation and derivatization can be accomplished in less than 90 min. The solid-phase extraction method is superior to a liquid–liquid extraction with ethylacetate with respect to both time and extraction efficiency. The total run time for one sample is 10 min. Despite the short run time, the method achieves high specificity. A high specificity is inherent to tandem MS methods, due to the isolation of a characteristic precursor ion in the first step, that gives rise to characteristic product ions in the second step. Only in the case of 3-methylcrotonylglycine and tiglylglycine, which are structural isomers, the same precursor ion had to be chosen because of very similar mass spectra of the two compounds. The product ion spectra of the precursor ion m /z  170 are also very similar for both organic acids. The most abundant ion in the product ion spectrum, which was for both analytes m /z  96, was chosen for the detection of the compounds. The retention time in comparison to the standard mixture that is run prior to the patient samples has to be used for the identification of the analyte in this case. When the standard mixture is run, the two peaks are always clearly distinguishable. A high sensitivity is also achieved by MS/MS. Although some analytes have low response factors, this is more than compensated for by the exclusion of the interfering matrix resulting in a high signal to noise ratio. High sensitivity is apparent for all analytes from Table 4 . All 14 organic acid markers could be detected in the majority of the normal control samples. The range of linearity varies for the 14 compounds. While the majority of the organic acid markers showed linearity between 0.1 and 5 or 10 ng/μl, fumaric acid, glutaric acid, butyrylglycine and adipic acid gave linear standard curves only up to 1 ng/μl. The limitations in some of the linearity ranges is not surprising since the standard curves were obtained over a concentration range of four orders of magnitude. They are in part due to the different response factors. Therefore, at the same analyte concentration different amounts of product ions will be generated and detected and saturation occurs at different concentrations. For the screening method, however, linear standard curves are not necessarily required because it is a semiquantitative method. Data analysis can be accomplished quickly, by simply monitoring the characteristic product ion chromatogram for each of the 14 organic acid markers, and determining the peak areas and retention times of the product ion peaks. The retention times are compared with the retention times of a standard mixture that includes all 14 analytes to confirm the identity of the detected compound. The determined peak areas are expressed as the ratios over the internal standard 2-ketocaproic acid, which can be accomplished with the fully automated software version for Saturn 2000 GC/MS instruments, and are then compared with the established reference values. Although 2-ketocaproic acid may not be an optimal internal standard for all the analytes for quantitative purposes, it is a satisfying internal standard in our semiquantitative method. There is very good reproducibility from one injection to the other and reasonable reproducibility from one extraction to the other. We determined the variation coefficients using three aliquots of a standard mixture that were extracted and injected on the same day or on different days. The same day variation for the 14 organic acid markers was between 0.5 and 8.5%, the day to day variation between 14.9 and 44.5%. If the internal standard is used to correct for variation of injection and extraction, the day to day variation amounted to between 4.1 and 34.7% (data not shown). Fig. 3  and Table 5  show that organic acidurias can be easily detected with this method. We therefore conclude that the method can be used as a quick metabolic screen for very sick patients in whom there is concern regarding the possibility of a treatable metabolic disorder.   Acknowledgements TH was a visiting scientist supported by a postdoctoral fellowship grant by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft. We greatly appreciate the advice and support of Frederic C. Glisson from Varian.   
