 d -Penicillamine (d -pen) is a drug used in the treatment of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), cystinuria and Wilson's disease. A small molecule, similar in structure to cysteine (see Fig. 2 ), it has a sulfhydryl group that allows it to couple covalently to proteins (Coleman et al., 1988 ), resulting in slow elimination from the body. Its mechanism of action in RA remains unclear, but its variable and unpredictable efficacy, coupled with a relatively high incidence of side-effects, has led to a decline in its use in recent years. Such side-effects include the development of a number of autoimmune disorders including lupus erythematosus, pemphigus, Goodpasture's syndrome, neuromyotonia and myasthenia gravis (MG; Fernandes et al., 1980 ). d -Pen is not the only drug capable of inducing autoimmune disease, but it is almost alone in its ability to cause autoimmune MG. As with other drug-induced disorders, d -pen-induced MG is associated with the development of autoantibodies, in this case to the acetylcholine receptor (AChR) (Russell and Lindstrom, 1978 ). The avidity and specificities of these autoantibodies in d -pen-induced MG are similar to those found in early-onset patients (EOMG), particularly early in the course of the disease (Vincent and Newsom-Davis, 1982 ; Heidenreich et al., 1988 ); however, the MG normally remits within 6 months of stopping the drug, with a concomitant fall in the anti-AChR antibody titer (Vincent et al., 1978 ; Kuncl et al., 1986 ), whereas idiopathic MG is usually long-lasting. Delamere et al. (1983) and Garlepp et al. (1983) reported that, in contrast with other MG subgroups, the condition is associated with HLA-DR1, though its rarity means that the numbers of patients studied are small. How d -pen induces MG is unclear. Administration of the drug to experimental animals did not result in the production of anti-AChR antibodies, although they showed an augmented antibody response to immunization with AChR and the resulting MG signs were sometimes more severe (Bever et al., 1984 ). The size of the molecule and its reactive sulfhydryl group suggest that the drug is acting as a hapten and/or modifying self protein(s)/peptide(s), thereby creating neo-epitope(s). Indeed, coupling of d -pen to an unidentified serum protein has been demonstrated in patients on d -pen therapy (Laycock et al., 1994 ), though its significance for autoimmunity is not clear. To examine the role of d -pen in MG, we have isolated a number of CD3+ , CD4+  T cell clones from the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of a patient with d -pen-induced MG that respond to the drug in vitro together with HLA-DR1+  PBMC. We provide evidence that the drug is acting by coupling directly to the MHC class II/peptide complex, and discuss how this might result in the development of MG.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Patient details We studied a 68-year old woman (D-P1) with erosive seropositive RA (HLA A1,32; B8,35; C4,701; DR1,3,DR52a; DQ2,5) who had been on d -pen treatment for 9 months before she developed right-sided ptosis. Six months later, single fiber electromyography in the affected orbicularis oculi muscle showed markedly increased jitter, consistent with a defect in neuromuscular transmission. Her anti-AChR antibody titer was 3.2 nM, confirming the diagnosis of MG: the d -pen treatment was therefore stopped. At this time, we took a blood sample from which d -pen-specific lines and clones were obtained. The recovery of her mainly ocular symptoms was slow; about two years after d -pen treatment started, she was given a short course of oral corticosteroids before they resolved completely within 9 further months.  2.2 Generation of primary T cell lines d -Pen HCl (Sigma, Poole, UK) was dissolved in sterile water and aliquots stored at −70°C. The cellular toxicity of the drug was determined by inhibition of PHA (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, USA)-induced proliferation of PBMCs from healthy controls by increasing concentrations of d -pen; doses of 100–500 μg/ml were found to be optimal, and toxicity was seen at doses of 1 mg/ml and above. PBMCs were separated from heparinized blood on Lymphoprep (Nycomed, Oslo, Norway), washed and cultured at 2×106 /1 ml well (Nunc, Roskilde, Denmark) with 100–500 μg/ml d -pen in RPMI (Hyclone, Cramlington, UK) supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated human serum (Blood Transfusion Service, Oxford, UK), l -glutamine (Gibco Life Technologies, Paisley, Scotland) and 50 μg/ml gentamycin (Gibco), i.e., without penicillin. After 7 days, stimulation was assessed by culturing triplicate samples (5%) from each well with 1 μCi of 3 H   thymidine (Amersham International, Amersham, UK) for 18 h, followed by harvesting onto filter mats (Wallac, Turku, Finland) and counting on a Betaplate flatbed liquid scintillation counter (Wallac). A response was considered positive when the activity was greater than twice the control value, i.e., the stimulation index (SI) was >2. We expanded positive wells into lines using a cycle of fortnightly restimulation with autologous 30 Gy-irradiated PBMC (PBMCx) and d -pen, and supplementing with 20U IL-2 (Biotest (UK), Solihull, UK) approximately every 72 h thereafter. Specificity of the lines for the drug was confirmed by culturing 3×104  T cells with 1×105  PBMCx pretreated with 500 μg/ml d -pen for 4 h at 37°C in RPMI/5% human serum and then washed twice before being used in the assay.  2.3 Isolation of d -pen-specific T cell clones One of the d -pen-specific lines derived from patient D-P1 was cloned by limiting dilution in Terasaki wells (Nunc) using PBMCx prepulsed with 500 μg/ml d -pen as the stimulus. Proliferating clones were expanded with IL-2 and fortnightly restimulation with PHA and allogeneic PBMCx, and then assayed for a response to d -pen, as described above. Specificity was confirmed by comparing the response to d -pen with that to the isomer, l -penicillamine, and the analogue, d -cysteine (both at 500 μg/ml; Sigma). Surface phenotype was determined by FACS analysis (Becton Dickinson, Oxford, UK) using conventional two color staining with anti-CD3 (OKT3) directly conjugated to fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC; gift of S.J. Curnow) and anti-CD4 and -CD8 conjugated to phycoerythrin (Dako, High Wycombe, UK).  2.4 Class II restriction The restricting class II isotype was determined by adding the following class II-blocking mAbs to the presenting cells in the standard assay: mouse anti-human DR (L243; gift of H. McDevitt), anti-human DP (gift of F. Brodsky) or anti-human DQ (L2; gift of D. Altmann). Comparing the ability of HLA-sharing PBMCx to present d -pen to the clones then identified the allele.  2.5 Cytokine profile The supernatant from T cell clones cultured with PBMCx's±d -pen was analyzed for interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and interleukin-4 (IL-4) by ELISA (Pharmingen, San Diego, CA) according to the manufacturer's instructions.  2.6 TCR gene usage T cell receptors were cloned using the anchored polymerase chain reaction (Moss et al., 1993 ). Briefly, cDNA was synthesized from 5 μg of RNA using AMV-RT and an oligo dT primer. cDNA was precipitated three times using 4 M ammonium acetate and an oligo dG homopolymer tail added using TdT. cDNA was then amplified using an anchor primer and primers complementary to TCRA and TCRB constant regions. PCR products were then cloned into M13mp18 and sequenced.  2.7 Requirement for human serum and antigen processing for antigenicity Fresh PBMCs were washed and kept in serum-free medium before irradiation and pulsing in plain RPMI, in 5% human or fetal calf serum (Tissue Culture Services, Buckingham, UK) or in serum-free AIM V® medium (Gibco) which contains human albumin, transferrin and insulin. The PBMCx were then counted so that any cell losses could be corrected. We also tested B cell lines, including the homozygous DR1 line EHM and one raised from the patient herself; they were pretreated with 50 μg/ml of mitomycin C (Sigma) and washed before co-culture with the T cells. The requirement for antigen processing was determined by preincubating the presenting cells with chloroquine (Sigma) for 30 min before pulsing with 500 μg/ml d -pen for 4 h, after which the cells were washed and plated routinely. To confirm their subsequent viability, we checked their capacity to present peptide antigen to a well characterized T cell clone, TB-2, that recognizes a fragment of the α subunit of the AChR, α:144–163, presented by DR52a (Nagvekar et al., 1998 ).   3 Results 3.1 Initial T cell responses to d -pen In a preliminary screen using d -pen at 500 μg/ml, we found positive responses by PBL T cells (SI>2) in four of five RA patients with recent onset d -pen MG (SIs 3–12); in one of four RA patients without MG or anti-AChR antibodies despite d -pen treatment (SI 4.1); in zero of three patients with idiopathic EOMG and in 4 of 11 healthy controls (SI 2.3, 4.5, 4.8 and 15.0). All of the d -pen MG patients had HLA-DR1, as did the one other responder with RA. However, none of the healthy responders was DR1+ ; some of their responses might conceivably be related to prior exposure to penicillin. Only one of the responder d -pen MG patients (D-P1; SI 4.3) was tested before taking corticosteroids; as she was readily available for further sampling, T cell lines were initiated from her for detailed characterization of this response.  3.2 Selecting d -pen-responsive T cell lines and clones from patient D-P1 Several T cell lines were successfully raised and maintained by culturing with d -pen at 500 μg/ml. Three findings established that this drug was not merely acting as a non-specific mitogen. Firstly, two well-characterized AChR-specific T cell clones, TB-2 and PM-A1, failed to show any proliferative response to d -pen at 50–500 μg/ml (not shown). Secondly, the drug-specific lines also responded optimally to autologous APC preincubated with the drug for 4 h and then washed thoroughly, while unpulsed autologous APC failed to stimulate. Thirdly, there was no response when the APC were HLA-mismatched (see below).  3.3 Characteristics of d -pen-specific T cell clones The d -pen-specific line that showed the greatest response to the drug was cloned by limiting dilution in the presence of d -pen-prepulsed autologous PBMCx. Among the 175 clones grown, 40% (70) responded to d -pen (SI>5), showing that there was a high precursor frequency of d -pen-specific T cells in the line. Some 10 clones were chosen for further study; they were all CD3+ CD4+  and behaved identically in all experiments, responding to autologous PBMCx preincubated with d -pen in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1  ). Moreover, the clones were highly specific for l -pen, as shown by their failure to respond to the analogues d -pen and d -cysteine (Fig. 2  ). The 10 clones tested all proved to be restricted to HLA-DR1. An isotype-specific anti-HLA-DR mAb almost completely blocked the responses of these clones (Fig. 3  a); furthermore, they all recognized d -pen-pulsed PBMCx from a number of healthy DR1+  individuals (Fig. 3 b). The two clones tested were both phenotypically Th1, producing large amounts of IFN-γ (2×104  pg/ml), but no detectable IL-4 (not shown). They proved to have identical TCR gene usage, namely Vα4.1, Jα1.3, Vβ6.1, Jβ2.3, suggesting that they are sister clones. Intriguingly, this β chain sequence shares a PG motif in the CDR3 region (Fig. 4  ) with a previously characterized AChR ε-specific T cell clone isolated from a patient with EOMG (Hill et al., 1999 ).  3.4 Potential `carrier' molecules for d -pen To determine whether the d -pen was coupling to a serum protein, PBMCx were pulsed with d -pen in the presence or absence of serum. Regardless of whether we used 5% human or fetal calf serum, serum-free AIM V® medium (containing human albumin, transferrin and insulin) or even plain RPMI, the PBMCx all stimulated the two T cell clones tested very efficiently (Fig. 5  ). This result suggested that the drug was coupling to pre-existing cellular proteins, whether internal or on the surface. To determine whether these require further processing, we tested the effects of chloroquine, a potent lysosomotropic inhibitor of antigen processing (Ziegler and Unanue, 1982 ). As a standard, we used the response of clone TB-2 to both the full-length AChR α subunit (α:1–437), which requires processing, and its peptide, α:144–163, which does not (Fig. 6  ). Pretreatment of PBMCx with chloroquine had no detectable effect on the responses to d -pen or α:144–163 at doses that almost completely abolished those to the full-length α:1–437 (Fig. 6 b), clearly showing that the key molecules modified by d -pen do not require subsequent processing. Thus, these data strongly suggest that d -pen is acting by directly coupling to a component of the MHC/peptide complex. It was therefore intriguing that two different DR1+  EBV-B cell lines (one of them autologous) consistently failed to `present' d -pen to the clones; this deficiency was not corrected by pre-culturing the EBV-B cells in human serum rather than the FCS in which these cells were normally maintained (Fig. 7  ). The autologous B cell line, which also has HLA-DR52a, presented specific peptides very well to the DR52a-restricted clone TB-2 when tested in parallel, confirming its efficient antigen-presenting ability. Thus, these results suggest that these T cells are recognizing a modification of some resident peptide, rather than of the DR1 itself, and that this peptide differs in the PBMC and the B cell lines.   4 Discussion In this study on d -pen-induced MG, we report the isolation and characterization of CD4+  Th1 cell clones specific for d -pen, which recognized DR1+  APC preincubated with the drug. Our evidence suggests that it is acting by directly modifying pre-existing MHC molecules and/or resident peptides on the APC surface, though the nature of this modification still requires elucidation. Responses of these T cells became significant at approximately 50 μg/ml of d -pen, and optimal at 500 μg/ml; the latter is very similar to that previously used in vitro for d -pen-specific T cells isolated from experimental animals immunized with the drug (O'Donnell and Coleman, 1992 ). It apparently contrasts with the peak levels of about 5 μg/ml measured in the peripheral blood of patients taking 750 mg/day (Brooks et al., 1984 ). However, much higher doses are usually required in culture than in vivo, as has been observed previously with other drugs such as sulfonamides, carbamazepine and phenytoin (Mauri-Hellweg et al., 1995 ), as well as with d -pen itself (O'Donnell and Coleman, 1992 ). It therefore seems likely that, in vivo, the drug becomes concentrated in specialized microenvironments or reactive under conditions that are not reproduced in culture, and/or that prolonged exposure is required. It is well recognized that d -pen can couple directly to proteins, forming disulfide bonds with free cysteine residues (Coleman et al., 1988 ): it can also break pre-existing disulfide bonds, and so unfold proteins or disaggregate complexes. Several published reports demonstrate that it couples directly to the surface of presenting cells of experimental animals in vivo, though the identity of the target protein(s) has not been determined. At doses of 125–1000 μg/ml, d -pen rapidly couples directly to the surface of rat macrophages, a process that is not affected by cell fixation or chloroquine, but is enhanced by oxidizing agents (O'Donnell et al., 1991 ). These cells take up the labeled drug in a dose- and time-dependent manner and retain it for over 24 h. In contrast, although lymphocytes rapidly acquire labeled d -pen, they also lose it completely within 2 h (Binderup and Arrigoni-Martelli, 1979 ). Our present results also suggest that d -pen is acting by coupling directly to the APC, and it seems logical to suppose that its target is the class II/peptide complex. Since there is a well-known association with HLA-DR1 in d -pen-induced MG (Garlepp et al., 1983 ), the uniform restriction of our clones to this allele argues strongly for their disease-relevance. This would be further supported if the same modification were already present in vivo on the APC of DR1+  MG patients taking d -pen, and recognizable by the D-P1 T cells. We were unable to test this possibility because our patient had stopped the treatment before enrolment in the study. Several other drugs/haptens are known to couple either to peptides resident in the MHC groove or directly to MHC molecules. Examples of the former include trinitrophenyl (TNP) and penicillin which both couple to lysine residues (Martin et al., 1992 ; Padovan et al., 1997 ), and nickel which couples to histidines (Romagnoli et al., 1992 ), while gold salts are thought to directly modify the class II molecule (Sinigaglia, 1994 ). Although further work is required to determine which of these two possibilities applies to d -pen, it is worthy of note that HLA-DR1 is the only human DR molecule that has an unpaired cysteine residue. It is at position 30 in the floor of the peptide-binding groove (Stern et al., 1994 ), where modification of analogous amino acids in other HLA alleles can dramatically alter T cell recognition of the epitope peptides (Krieger et al., 1991 ; Boehncke et al., 1993 ). Work on the class I allele HLA-B27 also suggests that oxidative modification of the unusual free sulfhydryl group (67 Cys  ) on this HLA molecule can directly influence its immunogenicity (Archer et al., 1990 ). The failure of the d -pen-treated B cell lines to stimulate our clones is intriguing and argues that the drug was modifying distinctive resident peptides in the autologous PBMC that are not identical in the B cell lines. It would therefore be interesting to identify the key cell type in the PBMC (e.g., macrophage or dendritic cell). One might then, in principle, take advantage of this failure by comparing the peptides that react with labeled d -pen in these cells and in the B cell lines, though they may be too heterogeneous to allow precise identification of the key epitope(s). Remarkably, however, one resident AChR peptide has already been identified in a DR3+  B cell line (Chicz et al., 1993 ). The d -pen-specific clones characterized here could provide important clues to the pathogenesis of both drug-induced and idiopathic MG. The first obvious mechanism is that d -pen-modified peptides activate T cells that can cross-react with epitopes derived from the AChR, though it is hard to envisage the exact nature of such cross-reactions, and, as yet, there is no direct evidence for them. In fact, the clone we tested showed no detectable recognition of either AChR or its α, γ or ε subunits after these were pre-incubated with d -pen (not shown), though some of the 69 other clones may be sufficiently sensitive to do so. We also tested five patients with d -pen-induced MG for recognition of the untreated AChR α-subunit (present in all isoforms), the fetal-specific γ and the adult-specific ε. Interestingly, in four of these five cases, we saw responses to the ε rather than the other subunits (not shown). Since the present case (D-P1) again appeared to be representative, we went on to isolate clones that proved to be specific for the ε:201–219 sequence (Hill et al., 1999 ). This also appears to be a dominant epitope for EOMG patients and is presented by the candidate susceptibility allele, DR52a (Hill et al., 1999 ). Thus, one might hypothesize that AChR-cross-reactive T cells initially activated by d -pen lead, by a process of determinant spreading, to responsiveness to the ε subunit that then induces a pathogenic autoantibody response, as in idiopathic MG. These T cells would be well equipped to help in the generation of complement-fixing antibodies by virtue of their Th1 cytokine profile. However, whereas this response appears to be self-perpetuating in EOMG, the antibody titers usually fall upon withdrawal of d -pen, with concomitant remission of symptoms. A second possibility is that d -pen directly `haptenates' AChR and/or AChR fragments that then activate pathogenic T cells. Hence, it is interesting that the above ε:201–219 sequence includes an unpaired 210 Cys   at p6 in the epitope core (Beeson et al., 1993 ). This residue appears to be important for T cell recognition, since pre-exposure to d -pen prevented this peptide from stimulating another ε201–219-specific clone from an EOMG patient (unpublished observations). Hence, this sequence itself may be an alternative target for d -pen modification. In either case, it is a particularly intriguing possibility that d -pen is mimicking the action of an as yet unidentified natural `counterpart' that is responsible for initiating the idiopathic disease. An analogous process has been implicated in other conditions presenting with autoimmune features such as the plant amino acid, canavanine, in SLE, and an analogue of l -tryptophan, 1,1′-ethylidenebis[l -tryptophan] that is thought to induce Eosinophilia–Myalgia syndrome (Yoshida and Gershwin, 1993 ). Although definitive proof that these agents are responsible for causing disease is awaited, the latter compound has been shown to be incorporated into self-proteins, apparently creating novel epitopes (Buss et al., 1996 ). Anti-hapten responses have also been implicated in active ankylosing spondylitis by the isolation of HLA-B27-restricted cytotoxic T cells that recognize both APC treated with the compound homocysteine and B cells infected with Salmonella typhimurium  (Gao et al., 1996 ). In summary, the isolation and characterization of these d -pen-specific T cell clones should provide a useful experimental system with which to elucidate the basis of hapten recognition by human T cells, and perhaps also the mechanisms of drug-induced autoimmune disease. Ultimately it may also provide insights into the factors involved in the initiation of idiopathic MG.   Acknowledgements We are very grateful to several colleagues for referring patients or providing mAbs, to donor D-P1 and to Drs. E. Sim, J. Coleman and A. Vincent for invaluable suggestions and advice. MEH was supported by the Medical Research Council of Great Britain.   
