 A clearer understanding of the role of vitamin A (retinol) in growth and development was achieved when it was discovered that retinoic acid, the carboxylic acid derivative of retinol, functions as a ligand controlling a nuclear receptor signaling pathway [1,2] . However, a full understanding of retinoid signaling will only come when the mechanisms regulating conversion of retinol to the active ligand retinoic acid are elucidated. Enzyme families able to participate in retinol metabolism have been discovered (reviewed in [3] ). In particular, some members of the alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) enzyme families are capable of catalyzing the oxidation of retinol to retinal, and some forms of aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) and cytochrome P -450 (CYP) can oxidize retinal to retinoic acid. Retinol oxidation is catalyzed by several distinct classes of cytosolic ADH [4–9]  as well as several different microsomal SDRs [10–12] . Further studies on these enzyme families should reveal the mechanisms of retinol oxidation needed to properly supply retinoic acid for retinoid signaling. Vertebrate ADH (EC 1.1.1.1) consists of a family of cytosolic, NAD-dependent, zinc-containing enzymes [13]  and a nomenclature based upon class distinctions has been described [14] . ADHs are capable of oxidizing a wide variety of aliphatic alcohols to their corresponding aldehydes [4,15,16] , and these aldehyde products act as substrates for members of the ALDH family which oxidize them to their corresponding carboxylic acids [17] . The ability of liver ADH, now known to consist primarily of class I ADH (ADH1), to utilize retinol as a substrate has been appreciated for many years [18,19] . However, recent studies have shown that human class IV ADH (ADH4) has even higher retinol-oxidizing activity than human ADH1 [5,7–9] . As further evidence that ADH1 and ADH4 play a role in retinoid signaling, the mouse homologs for these enzymes have been localized in numerous retinoid-responsive tissues including epidermis [20] , testis [21] , genitourinary tract [22] , digestive tract [23]  and neurula-stage embryos [24,25] . ADH may also participate in the production of retinoic acid as an endocrine hormone as demonstrated by the discovery of high levels of ADH1, ADH4, and retinoic acid in the adrenal cortex [26,27] . In addition to all-trans -retinol (vitamin A1 ) which is the most abundant form of vitamin A in mammals it has been demonstrated that several additional alcohol forms exist which play biological roles in retinoid signaling (Fig. 1  ). In human epidermis 3,4-didehydroretinol (vitamin A2 ) is present at 25% the level of all-trans -retinol [28] , and in chick embryos [29]  and Xenopus  embryos [30]  the level of 3,4-didehydroretinol is comparable to that of all-trans -retinol. Its carboxylic acid derivative 3,4-didehydroretinoic acid is produced in chick embryos [29,31]  and Xenopus  embryos [32] , and has been shown to activate retinoic acid receptors [33]  and have biological activity [34,35] . Another form of retinol is 9-cis -retinol which has been identified in rat kidney [36] . Its carboxylic acid derivative 9-cis -retinoic acid has been demonstrated to activate retinoic acid receptors as well as retinoid X receptors [37,38]  and has been shown to have biological activity [39] . In addition, 4-hydroxy-retinol and 4-oxo-retinol represent two additional natural forms of retinol [40] , and these plus 4-oxo-retinal and 4-oxo-retinoic acid have been demonstrated to activate retinoic acid receptors [40,41]  and have biological activity [42,43] . Little is known about the enzymes able to metabolize these additional natural retinols except in the case of 9-cis -retinol which is a substrate for ADH4 [8]  and some forms of SDR [12,44,45] . X-Ray crystallographic structures of horse class I ADH EE (ADH1E) [46] , human class I ADH ββ (ADH1B) [47,48] , codfish class I ADH (ADH1) [49] , human class III ADH (ADH3) [50] , and human class IV ADH (ADH4) [51]  have provided several well-defined ADH active sites. The structural determinants of substrate recognition indicate that vertebrate ADHs are best suited for the oxidation of long-chain aliphatic alcohols. Docking studies with human ADH1B and ADH4, which share 69% amino acid sequence identity, have shown that the active sites of both enzymes can accommodate all-trans -retinol, a compound containing a long-chain aliphatic alcohol group [51–54] . When compared with the crystal structure of the human ADH1B active site, models of the human ADH4 active site (prior to determination of its crystal structure) were found to be more well suited for binding of all-trans -retinol due to alterations in a loop from amino acid residues 114 to 120 including deletion of Gly117 which increases the width of the active site [52,54] . In order to gain further insight into the role of ADHs in retinol metabolism we have taken advantage of the recently determined crystal structure of human ADH4 which can now be directly compared with the previously known crystal structure of human ADH1B. We have developed a computer-aided molecular docking strategy to gauge the ability of all five natural retinols discussed above to successfully dock to the human ADH1B and ADH4 active sites. These binding models suggest that ADH active sites are well suited to play a role in the metabolism of a wide variety of natural retinols, and support a broad role for ADH in retinoid signaling.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Structural preparation Modeling took place in a Silicon Graphics Power Indigo R8000, and the simulations were performed in a Silicon Graphics Challenge DM 4xR10000. All structures were visually inspected using molecular modeling program QUANTA version 97.0711 (Molecular Simulations, San Diego, CA). The structural preparation of ADH1B, ADH4, and cellular retinol-binding protein II (CRBPII) needed to perform docking simulations was based upon molecular docking computational methods (DOCK 3.5) developed by Kuntz and co-workers [55,56] . Starting with the crystal structures of human ADH1B (i.e. the β1 β1  variant) [48] , human ADH4 [51] , and rat CRBPII [57] , ligands and all water molecules were removed from the binding pockets except for the structural waters that are part of the binding site in CRBPII, and except for the bound coenzyme NAD and catalytic zinc which are part of the active sites of ADH1B and ADH4. Amino acid residues surrounding the active site (ADHs) or binding site (CRBPII) were extracted using DOCK3.5. These truncated structures were used for all further computational work. A Connolly molecular surface for each binding pocket was calculated to identify grooves and invaginations [58] . The molecular surfaces of each binding pocket were filled with a set of overlapping spheres of different radii using DOCK3.5. These sphere centers (approx. 60–80 spheres per binding site) represented the negative image of the target site where docking simulations and evaluation of quality of fit took place. All dockings were performed with the protein binding site as described above remaining rigid. Structures for all-trans -retinol, 9-cis -retinol, 3,4-didehydroretinol, 4-oxo-retinol, and 4-hydroxy-retinol were also modeled. To overcome the rigid-body docking constraint, we generated different conformations of each retinol as follows. The initial structures were modeled after the crystallographic coordinates of all-trans -retinol in holo-CRBPII [57]  using the Quanta molecular editor module. Partial charges were calculated and the structures were then optimized using the molecular modeling system InsightII version 97.0 builder module (Molecular Simulations) by minimizing the initial structure applying Steepest Descents and Quasi Newton methods (1000 steps). The optimized retinols were then used as the initial structures to generate different conformations throughout a series of Monte Carlo random sampling runs using QUANTA. A set of conformations for each retinol structure was saved in protein databank format (PDB) and then converted into DOCK3.5 format.  2.2 Docking simulations In order to evaluate the goodness of fit subsequent to docking, each orientation was evaluated based on its shape complementary (contact score) and molecular mechanics interaction energy (force field score). Contact scoring uses a loose approximation to the Lennard-Jones potential, and force field scoring uses the AMBER potential. For all our experiments, we used both scoring functions and applied the DOCK3.5 rigid-body minimization algorithm to optimize the interaction energies. Therefore, grids containing contact limits, electrostatic values, Van der Waals attraction and repulsion values were calculated. For the AMBER force-field potentials of coenzyme NAD, the explicit parameters of each atom in NAD were added to the DOCK AMBER parameters based on previous studies [59,60] . Additional programs in the DOCK suite allowed us to calculate root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) and least-squares rmsd values, close contacts, number of bumps, and to recalculate contact scores for rigid-body minimized orientations. Initial docking was performed in the search mode for each retinol using the set of different conformations generated as described above. For each search run the same parameters were used in addition to the usage of critical clusters, rigid-body minimization, contact scoring, and force field scoring. We used critical clusters to define critical binding regions, thus constraining DOCK to focus on the site near the catalytic zinc in ADH, or the region near Glu108 in CRBPII. In order to define critical clusters, the closest sphere center to the catalytic zinc (ADH) or Glu108 (CRBPII) was assigned as the critical cluster and for each retinol C-15 was designated the critical atom. Utilizing critical clusters DOCK eliminated all conformations that failed to achieve a distance of at least 1.5 Å between the critical cluster and retinol C-15. In ADH1B the critical region was equivalent to the area where a water molecule is coordinated by the catalytic zinc in the crystal structure [47] . For retinol orientations having a contact score >0 and a force field score <10 kcal/mol, the orientation was rigid-body minimized and evaluated again for the contact score and force field score. Also, for dockings with ADH1B and ADH4, the NAD, zinc, and Thr48 distances were calculated, i.e. NAD C-4 to retinol C-15, catalytic zinc to retinol hydroxyl group, and Thr48 hydroxyl group to retinol hydroxyl group, respectively. In the case of CRBPII dockings, the Glu108 distance was calculated, i.e. Glu108 amide group to retinol hydroxyl group. The results were analyzed using program X-Motif Graphics to determinate which retinol conformation achieved the best orientation for each protein examined. Potential candidates were visually inspected to identify location of bumps and potential hydrogen bonds if any. The selected retinol conformation with the best orientation inside the active site was energy minimized using QUANTA CHARMm module. To do this we constrained all non-hydrogen atoms in the protein, and allowed the selected conformation to be optimized by applying Steepest Descents (1000 steps). As a final step the optimized conformation determined for each retinol was re-docked to gain more information about potential orientations within each protein binding site. The final docking was performed using single mode, critical clusters, rigid-body minimization, contact scoring, and force field scoring. In this run DOCK3.5 was constrained to select only those orientations achieving a force field score ≤0 kcal/mol and no more than one bump per orientation.   3 Results and discussion 3.1 Test of retinol docking strategy The three-dimensional structure of a high-affinity complex between all-trans -retinol and cellular retinol-binding protein type II (holo-CRBPII) has been determined to a resolution of 1.9 Å [57] . As a test of our molecular docking strategy (see Section 2 ) all-trans -retinol was removed from the complex and docking experiments between it and CRBPII were performed using DOCK3.5. The unchanged conformation of all-trans -retinol derived from the crystal structure was successfully docked to CRBPII as determined by achieving a rmsd of 0.19 Å compared to the crystal structure which was resolved to 1.9 Å. A set of all-trans -retinol conformations derived by Monte Carlo random sampling were also docked to CRBPII, resulting in an orientation with a rmsd value of 0.39 Å relative to the crystal structure. The conformation of all-trans -retinol present in this latter docked orientation was quite similar to that in the crystal structure as shown by a least-squares rmsd value of 0.37 Å. Docking to CRBPII was also performed with a set of Monte Carlo random sampling conformations generated for 9-cis -retinol, 3,4-didehydroretinol, 4-oxo-retinol, and 4-hydroxy-retinol, and the results were compared to those for all-trans -retinol (Fig. 1 ). The most favorable conformation and docked orientation for each retinol structure were selected using the criteria of force field score, contact score, and distance to amino acid residue Gln108 (Table 1  ). A critical measure of the docking efficiency was the attainment of a distance of 2.98 Å between the hydroxyl group of all-trans -retinol and the side chain amide group of Gln108 in CRBPII, a distance nearly identical to that in the crystal structure of holo-CRBPII (3.02 Å). This close proximity allows the formation of a hydrogen bond important for high affinity binding in holo-CRBPII [57] . Also, the docked all-trans -retinol had a force field score of −29.9 kcal/mol and a contact score of 110, values nearly identical to those observed in the holo-CRBPII crystal structure (−27.0 kcal/mol and 105, respectively) (Table 1 ). The most favorable docking obtained with 9-cis -retinol gave a hydroxyl-Gln108 distance of 3.52 Å (too large for a hydrogen bond), whereas the most favorable docking achieved for 3,4-didehydroretinol gave a hydroxyl-Gln108 distance of 3.00 Å, nearly identical to that for all-trans -retinol (Table 1 ). Also, the docked 9-cis -retinol had a significantly higher force field score (−21.0 kcal/mol) than that observed for 3,4-didehydroretinol (−27.9 kcal/mol) or all-trans -retinol (−29.9 kcal/mol), further indicating that the 9-cis  conformation is unfavorable for reaching the CRBPII binding site. These results provide another validation of our docking strategy since previous in vitro binding studies have clearly shown that 9-cis -retinol has no detectable binding to CRBPII whereas 3,4-didehydroretinol does bind with high affinity similar to all-trans -retinol [61] . Docking of 4-oxo-retinol and 4-hydroxy-retinol to CRBPII resulted in hydroxyl-Gln108 distances of 2.91 Å and 2.90 Å, respectively, and force field scores of −28.7 kcal/mol and −30.2 kcal/mol, respectively (Table 1 ). Thus, docking of these two oxygenated retinols is quite favorable. No in vitro binding data for CRBPII with either 4-oxo-retinol or 4-hydroxy-retinol was found in the literature. Our docking models predict that 4-oxo-retinol and 4-hydroxy-retinol, like all-trans -retinol and 3,4-didehydroretinol, will demonstrate high affinity binding to CRBPII.  3.2 Docking of retinols to human ADH1B and ADH4 The docking methods discussed above, which proved successful for CRBPII, were used to dock all-trans -retinol, 9-cis -retinol, 3,4-didehydroretinol, 4-oxo-retinol, and 4-hydroxy-retinol to the active sites of human ADH1B and ADH4. The three-dimensional structures for each active site were based upon recent X-ray crystallographic studies of ADH1B determined to a resolution of 2.5 Å [48]  and ADH4 determined to a resolution of 3.0 Å [51] . Docking was performed with the same set of Monte Carlo random sampling conformations generated for each retinol structure above. In order to obtain an unbiased view of the success of docking, all docked orientations with force field scores 0 kcal/mol and contact scores >0 were examined for their proximity to the catalytic zinc atom (which functions in orientation of the alcohol group) and bound NAD coenzyme (which functions in hydride transfer during alcohol oxidation) [48,51] . The orientations obtained for each retinol substrate inside the active sites of either ADH1B or ADH4 were plotted with respect to the distances between the catalytic zinc and the substrate hydroxyl oxygen (zinc distance) versus the distances between NAD C-4 and substrate C-15 which donates the hydrogen to NAD during hydride transfer (NAD distance). Linear regression analysis of these results show that all retinols examined (each approx. 15 Å in length) can enter and dock along at least some portion of the ADH1B and ADH4 active sites, both of which stretch approx. 16 Å from the enzyme surface to the catalytic zinc (Fig. 2  ). These results demonstrate that 9-cis -retinol and 3,4-didehydroretinol are unable to dock close to the catalytic zinc of ADH1B since their closest zinc distances ranged from 5.3 to 5.9 Å and their closest NAD distances ranged from 4.5 to 4.7 Å (Fig. 2B,C ). However, all other retinol-ADH combinations underwent much more favorable docking since the closest zinc distances ranged from 1.9 to 2.4 Å and the closest NAD distances ranged from 3.2 to 3.6 Å (Fig. 2A,D,E ). These latter distances would place the retinol structure in a favorable position for hydride transfer as shown by previous ADH crystallographic studies [62] . Logarithmic regression plots of the zinc distances versus the contact scores for each retinol-ADH combination show that docked orientations which are closer to the zinc show higher, more favorable contact scores for both enzyme active sites (Fig. 3  ), thus illustrating the lock-and-key concept between substrate and enzyme. Logarithmic regression plots of the zinc distances versus the force field scores show that ADH1B and ADH4 differ markedly in the energy of docked orientations (Fig. 4  ). In the case of all-trans -retinol docked in the ADH1B active site, it can be seen that docked orientations which are closer to the catalytic zinc have higher (less favorable) energies than those further away, whereas the reverse is true for docking in the ADH4 active site (Fig. 4A ). For 9-cis -retinol there is no significant change in energy as it approaches the catalytic zinc of ADH1B, but there is a significant decrease in energy as 9-cis -retinol approaches the catalytic zinc of ADH4 as well as a closer approach (Fig. 4B ). For 3,4-didehydroretinol it is observed that force field scores rise sharply for docked orientations as they approach the catalytic zinc of ADH1B, but a significant decrease in force field scores is observed for ADH4 docking (Fig. 4C ). In contrast, 4-oxo-retinol and 4-hydroxy-retinol docked orientations show a drop in their force field scores for both enzymes as these substrates approach the catalytic zinc (Fig. 4D,E ).  3.3 Most favorable orientations of docked retinols relative to the catalytic zinc, NAD, and Thr48 Docking results for the most favorable orientation of each retinol in either the ADH1B or the ADH4 active sites are shown (Table 2  ). The zinc and NAD distances are indicated as well as the distances between the substrate hydroxyl group and Thr48 which form a hydrogen bond [62] . With the exception of 9-cis -retinol and 3,4-didehydroretinol in the ADH1B active site, all these docked structures exhibit distances from the catalytic zinc (1.9–2.4 Å), NAD (3.2–3.6 Å), and Thr48 (2.6–3.1 Å) which favorably orient the substrate hydroxyl group and adjacent C-15 for hydride transfer from C-15 of the substrate to C-4 of NAD. Docking of 9-cis -retinol and 3,4-didehydroretinol in the ADH1B active site results in orientations unfavorable for alcohol oxidation since the closest distances from the catalytic zinc (5.3–5.9 Å), NAD (4.5–4.7 Å), and Thr48 (4.6–4.9 Å) were too far to promote hydride transfer. The force field scores and contact scores for these most favorable orientations provide a good indication of the relative docking abilities of ADH1B and ADH4. The force field scores for all five retinols examined were much more favorable when docked to ADH4 (−22.3 to −27.5 kcal/mol) as opposed to ADH1B (−1.2 to −14.0 kcal/mol) (Table 2 ). Also, for all retinols except 4-oxo-retinol the contact scores were higher when docked to ADH4 rather than ADH1B (Table 2 ). Computer-generated images of the most favorable docked orientations for all-trans -retinol, 9-cis -retinol, 3,4-didehydroretinol, and 4-oxo-retinol are shown (Fig. 5  ). The docked structures for 4-oxo-retinol and 4-hydroxy-retinol were essentially identical (image not shown for the latter). It is seen that the ADH4 active site is wider than that of ADH1B as reported previously [51] . The images clearly show that all-trans -retinol and 4-oxo-retinol gain close access to the ADH1B catalytic zinc and NAD as well as Thr48 which is hydrogen-bonded to the substrate hydroxyl (Fig. 5A,D ). In contrast, 9-cis -retinol and 3,4-didehydroretinol cannot fully enter the ADH1B active site, having zinc, NAD, and Thr48 distances all in excess of 4.5 Å (Fig. 5B,C ). In the case of the ADH4 active site it is seen quite clearly that all four retinol structures dock closely to the catalytic zinc, NAD, and Thr48 (Fig. 5E–H ).  3.4 ADH4 has a more favorable retinol-binding site than ADH1B The much lower force field scores attained for docking of all five retinols in the ADH4 active site relative to the ADH1B active site, as well as the ability of 9-cis -retinol and 3,4-didehydroretinol to closely approach the catalytic zinc only in ADH4, indicate that ADH4 is more well designed for binding diverse retinols. This correlates with in vitro enzymatic activity assays for oxidation of all-trans -retinol indicating catalytic efficiencies for human ADH4 of 1.9–4.5 μM−1  min−1  and for human ADH1B (β1 β1 ) of 0.02–0.04 μM−1  min−1 , a difference of approx. 100-fold [5,7] . Interestingly, the β2 β2  variant of human ADH1B (which differs from β1 β1  only by having histidine at residue 47 rather than arginine) has been reported to have a catalytic efficiency for retinol oxidation of 1.8 μM−1  min−1 , thus only about 2-fold less than ADH4 [9] . However, another report indicates that the catalytic efficiency for β2 β2  is 0.18 μM−1  min−1  using different assay conditions, thus still about 20-fold less active than ADH4 [7] . In either case the β2 β2  variant is more active for retinol oxidation than the β1 β1  variant. This may be due to less tight binding of NAD by β2 β2  leading to a faster turnover rate since residue 47 is involved in coenzyme binding [48] . These observations indicate that the ability of ADHs to use retinol is governed not only by the overall size of the active site, but also by residue 47 lying immediately adjacent to the active site residue Thr48. Enzyme activity assays with 9-cis -retinol and 9-cis -retinal have shown that human ADH4 is very active with these substrates demonstrating catalytic efficiencies of 9.0–13.3 μM−1  min−1 [8] , whereas human ADH1B has nearly undetectable activity for 9-cis -retinal demonstrating a catalytic efficiency of only 0.0084 μM−1  min−1 [5] . Our docking models predict that both 9-cis -retinol and 3,4-didehydroretinol can function as very good substrates for ADH4, but not for ADH1B. Our models further predict that 4-oxo-retinol and 4-hydroxy-retinol can function as substrates for both enzymes with ADH4 having a much higher catalytic efficiency as is the case for all-trans -retinol. Our findings indicate that 9-cis -retinol and 3,4-didehydroretinol cannot assume conformations which allow full access into the relatively narrow ADH1B active site. In the case of 9-cis -retinoids it is already clear that the presence of a cis  as opposed to a trans  double bond configuration at C-9 has a significant effect upon the ability of the carboxylic acid forms to bind to retinoid X receptors which have a strong selectivity for 9-cis -retinoic acid over all-trans -retinoic acid [37,38] . Our docking models predict that ADH1B has a selectivity for trans  as opposed to cis  retinol substrates. The inability of 9-cis -retinol to enter the ADH1B active site may be due to steric hindrance of the C-19 methyl group (Fig. 5B ). This situation is not true for ADH4 which has a wider active site than ADH1B due to deletion of Gly117 and substitution of Leu for Tyr110 [52,54]  leading to an accommodation of the C-19 methyl group of 9-cis -retinol (Fig. 5F ). However, the inability of 3,4-didehydroretinol to fully enter the ADH1B active site is less obvious. We suggest that the presence of the extra double bond in the ring structure of 3,4-didehydroretinol produces a smaller ring configuration which is more conformationally restrictive, thus placing the C-19 methyl group in an unfavorable position for entry into the narrow ADH1B active site (Fig. 5C ) but without restricting access to the wider ADH4 active site (Fig. 5G ).  3.5 Conclusions The retinol docking strategy described here has provided results which are consistent with the three-dimensional structure of holo-CRBPII [57] , with the known binding properties of CRBPII for all-trans -retinol, 9-cis -retinol, and 3,4-didehydroretinol [61] , and with the enzymatic properties of ADH1B and ADH4 for all-trans -retinol and 9-cis -retinol [5,8,52] . The studies reported here use the known crystal structures for both ADH1B and ADH4, and demonstrate that the ADH4 active site is well suited to bind all-trans -retinol, 9-cis -retinol, 3,4-didehydroretinol, 4-oxo-retinol, and 4-hydroxy-retinol, whereas ADH1B has a more restrictive active site which will accommodate only all-trans -retinol, 4-oxo-retinol, and 4-hydroxy-retinol, and these to a lesser extent than ADH4. This suggests that ADH4 plays a major role in the metabolism of a diverse array of natural retinol structures implicated as precursors for the active retinoid receptor ligands all-trans -retinoic acid, 9-cis -retinoic acid, 3,4-didehydroretinoic acid, 4-oxo-retinoic acid, and 4-hydroxy-retinoic acid. The docking models suggest that ADH1B plays only a minor role if any in the metabolism of 9-cis -retinol or 3,4-didehydroretinol, and that this enzyme is more likely to participate in the metabolism of 4-oxo-retinol, 4-hydroxy-retinol, and to a lesser extent all-trans -retinol. The ability of ADH1B and ADH4 active sites to accommodate various retinol substrates provides impetus to further examine how broad a role ADH plays in the production of active ligands for retinoid signaling.    Acknowledgements We thank H.L. Ang, L. Deltour, R.J. Haselbeck, and I. Hoffmann for critical discussions, and D. Zimmerman in the Burnham Institute Computer Resources Department for computational expertise. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant AA07261.   
