 Pyrethroids belong to the most frequently used pesticides. People exposed to pyrethroids do not only include workers in the chemical industry (production, filling, formulation), farmers and pest control operators but also the consumers. In humans, pyrethroids are rapidly metabolised by esterases, mainly in the liver. The detoxified metabolites are renally eliminated, the elimination half-life time (t 1/2 ) for the metabolites being about 6 h (Leng et al., 1997a ). After cyfluthrin exposure 93% of the metabolites are eliminated during the first 24 h (Leng et al., 1997a ). For assessing a cyfluthrin exposure the metabolites are routinely determined in urine (Leng et al., 1996, 1997b ). Although, several studies have shown that there is no correlation between the metabolite concentration in urine and the symptoms mentioned (Kolmodin-Hedman et al., 1995; Leng, 1998a; Wieseler et al., 1998 ). As a marker of biological effects the unchanged pyrethroid has to be determined in plasma. Here, the problem is that pyrethroids are only present for a few hours after exposure (Leng et al., 1997b; Leng and Lewalter, 1998b ). As local symptoms occurring after pyrethroid exposure mostly skin paresthesia and irritations of the upper respiratory tract are reported (He et al., 1988 ). In general, the occurrence, kind and extend of a symptom depends on the route of exposure (oral or inhalative and dermal), the pyrethroid dose, the particle size or the local concentration of the pyrethroid on the nerve ending. But the individual occurrence or even the severity of a symptom like skin paresthesia cannot be explained by this alone. Here, the individual metabolic capacity of e.g. the skin seems to play a very important role. For pyrethroids no marker of susceptibility is known yet. This is in contrast to organophosphates and carbamates. Here, cholinesterase variants are known to be responsible for the individual susceptibility regarding the occurrence and severity of the related symptom. Paraoxonase present in human plasma was shown to be under genetic control with high and low activities. Variations in plasma paraoxonase activity may contribute to interindividual variations in susceptibility (McCracken et al., 1993 ). Apart from the cholinesterases the membrane bound non-specific carboxylesterases (EC 3.1.1.1, systematic name: carboxylic-ester hydrolase) are known to detoxify xenobiotics containing aliphatic esters. This enzyme is inhibited by organophosphates like paraoxon (Junge et al., 1974; Tsujita and Okuda, 1983 ). Carboxylesterases are present e.g. in skin, muscle, kidney, brain and serum with the highest esterase activity found in the liver (Satoh, 1987 ). Aim of this study was to find out which markers correlate with pyrethroid induced adverse effects. Therefore, the use of determining pyrethroids in plasma, pyrethroid metabolites in urine and esterase activities was evaluated.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Study 1—Pyrethroid metabolites in urine Twenty-two pest control operators regularly exposed to the pyrethroids cyfluthrin (n =16), permethrin (n =3), deltamethrin (n =2) and cypermethrin (n =1) as well as a non-exposed control group of 20 subjects were investigated. At the end of the working week 24 h urine was collected and the concentration of the metabolites was determined by GC/MS (LOD: 0.5 μg/l) (Kühn et al., 1996 ). Moreover, a medical interview was performed in which reported symptoms were documented (Wieseler et al., 1998 ).  2.2 Study 2—Half-life time of cyfluthrin metabolites in urine Four healthy male volunteers were exposed for 60 min to a mean cyfluthrin concentration of 160 μg/m3  (Leng et al., 1997a ). The study design and the medical surveillance of the volunteers was approved by an independent ethical committee after a review of data on animal toxicity and consideration of the dose levels in relation to a proposed acceptable daily intake (ADI) of 0.02 mg/kg per day cyfluthrin. Urine was collected in the following intervalls: before and immediately after the exposure, 1–2 h/2–3 h/3–4 h/4–5 h/5–6 h/6–12 and 12–24 h after exposure. Cyfluthrin metabolites cis - and trans - 3-(2,2-dichlorovinyl)-2,2-dimethylcyclopropanecarboxylic acid (DCCA) and fluorophenoxybenzoic acid (FPBA) were determined in urine by GC/MS (Kühn et al., 1996 ). As a first order kinetic for the urinary excretion of cyfluthrin metabolites was assumed, a linear regression analysis was performed on urinary rate versus mid-point time from peak excretion to 24 h after exposure. The t 1/2  was estimated from the expression 0.693/(slope×2.303).  2.3 Study 3—Half-life time of cyfluthrin in plasma Eight workers in the chemical industry were investigated after intoxications (Leng and Lewalter, 1998b ). Four workers were exposed to cyfluthrin and four were exposed to cyfluthrin and methyl-parathion. Blood was drawn 30 min after exposure and 3 h later. Both pesticides were determined in plasma and the t 1/2  of cyfluthrin in plasma was calculated with the assumption of a simple first order decay (t 1/2 =0.693/slope×2.303).  2.4 Determination of transfluthrin in human plasma Native human plasma naturally containing cholinesterase and carboxylesterase was dotated with transfluthrin (1 mg/l). The change of transfluthrin concentration during time was measured. In another experiment, 2 U/ml commercially available carboxylesterase (EC 3.1.1.1 from porcine liver, 1000 units, Sigma) was added. Transfluthrin concentration change was again documented. The method for the determination of transfluthrin in plasma is described elsewhere (Kühn, 1997 ).  2.5 Determination of carboxylesterase activity in human isolated lymphocytes A total of 5 ml venous blood was drawn from which 2–3 mio (theoretically 6–10 mio) lymphocytes/ml were isolated and quantified on slides under the microscope. Lymphocytes were solved in 1 ml 100 mM buffer (pH 8) containing 13.6 g KH2 PO4 /l and 17.4 g K2 HPO4 /l. As a substrate, 10 μl of a cyfluthrin solution (cyano-group containing pyrethroid) was added (30 mg cyfluthrin /10 ml DMF). As a positive control commercially available carboxylesterase was used (5 U/25 μl buffer). The sample was incubated for 30 min at 40°C. A total of 1 ml of the lymphocyte suspension was placed in a glass tube with screw cap. The applied method is based on kryptate formation using Kryptofix 222 B polymer as a phase-transfer-catalyst to transfer the cyanide anion formed by the degradation of cyfluthrin from the aqueous alkaline solution to the organic dichloromethane phase (Chen et al., 1990 ). As a derivatization agent pentafluorobenzyl bromide was used and the formated pentafluorobenzyl cyanide was determined by GC/MS. 2,3,5,6-tetrachloronitrobenzol served as an internal standard. A total of 100 μl of the organic phase was removed into a micro vial. The injection vol. was 1 μl. Capillary gas chromatography was applied using a Hewlett-Packard MSD with a GC 5890, an autoinjector HP 7673 and a HP 5973 mass selective detector equipped with an apolar DB-5 MS fused silica capillary (50 m length, 0.2 mm i.d., 0.33 μm film) attached to a retention gap with helium as a carrier gas at a pressure of 160 kPa. The split was open during injection, closed after 0.2 min for 1 min and remained open during GC run. The following GC temperature program was used: The capillary column was maintained at 35°C for 2 min and programmed from 35°C at 10°C/min to 230°C, holding for 2 min and then programmed from 230°C at 20°C/min to 280°C. The injector temperature was held at 280°C and the detector temperature was set at 300°C (MSD-transfere line). For identification and quantitation mass spectra were obtained by electron impact (EI, 70 eV) using selected ion monitoring (SIM) (Chen et al., 1990 ). The signal-to-noise value of pentafluorobenzyl cyanide at a concentration level of 25 μg/l of cyanide was 3:1. The average in run-coefficient of variation was 10% (50 μg/l, n =10).   3 Results 3.1 Study 1—Pyrethroid metabolites in urine In Fig. 1   the symptoms mentioned by 22 pest control operators and 20 control subjects are presented. There was no significant difference between these groups. Fig. 2   shows that there was no correlation between the concentration of pyrethroid metabolites in urine and the occurrence of symptoms.  3.2 Study 2—Half-life time of cyfluthrin metabolites in urine By determining the interindividual differences in cyfluthrin metabolism in human volunteers it was obvious that there were subjects with a slow and with a fast rate of metabolism (Fig. 3  ). Overall, the longer the t 1/2 , the more the symptom.  3.3 Study 3—Half-life time of cyfluthrin in plasma Table 1   shows the interindividual differences in cyfluthrin metabolism following a single cyfluthrin as well as a mixed cyfluthrin and methyl-parathion exposure. As a result, an equal amount of cyfluthrin, shown by nearly identical cyfluthrin concentrations in plasma, leads to different t 1/2  of cyfluthrin in plasma. In case skin paresthesia occurred, a comparable long cyfluthrin t 1/2  was found. Concerning a mixed exposure (pyrethroid plus organophosphate), a similar amount of exposure leads to t 1/2  of cyfluthrin variing between 1 and 14 h. In general, in case of a mixed exposure there was a tendency of a longer t 1/2  of cyfluthrin in plasma. Skin paresthesia was not mentioned in case of a short t 1/2 .  3.4 Determination of transfluthrin in human plasma Transfluthrin was hydrolysed very slowly (>60 h) in human plasma, i.e. cholinesterase does not seem to be responsible for transfluthrin metabolism. In case carboxylesterase was added, hydrolysis was much faster (<30 min).  3.5 Determination of carboxylesterase activity in human isolated lymphocytes Fig. 4   shows the dependance of cyanic acid production on the cyfluthrin concentration. The amount of carboxylesterase was constant, i.e. 1 U/ml commercially available carboxylesterase or 5 mio isolated lymphocytes/ml. Moreover, having a constant substrate concentration, the amount of cyanic acid produced was dependant on the amount of carboxylesterase used. First hints for interindividual differences in cyanic acid production are demonstrated in Fig. 5  .   4 Discussion This study demonstrates that the individual susceptibility plays a major role in pyrethroid induced adverse effects like skin paresthesia. In humans, pyrethroids are assumed to be rapidly metabolized by a hydrolytic cleavage (esterases) into their corresponding metabolites cis - and trans -3-(2,2-dichlorovinyl)-2,2-dimethylcyclopropane carboxylic acid or cis -3-(2,2-dibromovinyl)-2,2-dimethylcyclopropane carboxylic acid. The alcohol moiety is oxidised (mixed-functional oxidases) to 4-fluoro-3-phenoxybenzoic acid or 3-phenoxybenzoic acid (Kühn et al., 1996 ). The acids are partly conjugated to e.g. glucuronic acid and finally renally eliminated (Wollen et al., 1992 ). The determination of the t 1/2  of eighter pyrethroids in plasma or metabolites in urine is a good tool to get indirect information about individual pyrethroid metabolism. It turned out that only in case of a long t 1/2  of cyfluthrin in plasma skin paresthesia occurred. The t 1/2  of cyfluthrin in plasma was longer in case of a mixed exposure than in case of a single one. This might be explained by the inhibition of the cyfluthrin degrading esterase by the organophosphate methyl-parathion. In case of a direct measurement of pyrethroid susceptibility the activity of the esterase responsible for pyrethroid metabolism has to be determined. In contrast to organophosphates and carbamates, the cholinesterase does not seem to play a role in pyrethroid metabolism. Apart from the cholinesterase the carboxylesterase is a widespread esterase as well. It is known that several carboxylesterases exist with wide and overlapping substrate specifities. As a model substrate for carboxylesterase 1-naphthyl acetate (which produces 1-naphtol) is often used (Williams, 1985 ). After pyrethroid exposure skin paresthesia is frequently reported. There are interindividual differences concerning the occurrence and the severity of this symptom. This might be explained by individual different levels of carboxylesterase activity in the skin as it is known that the human skin contains at least four different carboxylesterases (Heymann et al., 1993 ). With the help of in-vitro experiments it was demonstrated that pyrethroids are hydrolyzed by carboxylesterases. As in comparison to rats human plasma contains only very little carboxylesterase (McCracken et al., 1993 ) and the liver is not easily accessible for routine measurements, we wanted to find out if there is a measurable carboxylesterase activity in human isolated lymphocytes. Cyfluthrin, a pyrethroid containing a cyano-group, was used as a substrate. As a parameter of carboxylesterase activity the production of cyanic acid was measured. First hints showed that the determination of carboxylesterase acitivity in lymphocytes is a most promising start to measure the individual pyrethroid susceptibility.  5 Conclusion The determination of the carboxylesterase activity in human isolated lymphocytes is a first step in the search of a marker of pyrethroid susceptibility in man. To obtain information concerning the individual rate of metabolism, the t 1/2  of the pyrethroids in plasma and of the pyrethroid metabolites in urine should be determined. As a marker of exposure the determination of pyrethroid metabolites in urine is indicated.   Acknowledgements The authors thank Dr K.-H. Kühn (Institute of Hygiene, University Duesseldorf) and D. Ellrich (Bayer AG, Leverkusen) for the GC/MS measurements.   
