 An accurate estimation of the onset of oestrus in cows is vital to the cost-efficient application of artificial insemination (AI) procedures (Ball, 1982 ). The steroid hormone progesterone, which is secreted by the corpus luteum, functions to prepare the uterus for pregnancy and to maintain pregnancy following conception. Fluctuations in the level of secreted progesterone are reflected throughout the oestrus cycle by the concentration of the hormone present in cows’ milk. It follows that by monitoring milk progesterone concentration it has been possible accurately to predict the onset of oestrus; using enzyme immunoassay methodology (Foulkes et al., 1982a ), it has been demonstrated that optimum fertility rates can be achieved when AI is performed on the third day of sustained low milk progesterone concentration (Foulkes et al., 1982b; Foulkes and Goodey, 1988 ). The search for a rapid, convenient and inexpensive means of frequently monitoring milk progesterone levels in a herd of animals has led into research toward a user-friendly on-the-farm device. One such approach is a disposable screen-printed amperometric biosensor. Previously, we described the development of a prototype progesterone biosensor comprising mAb immobilised on the working surface of a screen-printed carbon electrode (SPCE). It operated in a competitive immunoassay format, relying upon a reduction in the binding of enzyme-labelled progesterone in the presence of endogenous milk progesterone. Initial proof-of-principle was provided from experiments conducted in aqueous buffer solution using phenyl phosphate as substrate for the enzyme alkaline phosphatase, with a chronoamperometric readout dependent on the oxidation of phenol at a potential of +700 mV versus SCE (Hart et al., 1997 ). Operating at this relatively high electrode potential, however, it was not possible to obtain a calibration in milk, due to variable adsorption, at the electrode surface, of electroactive species present within this complex matrix (Pemberton et al., 1998 ); even washing with solvents of varying polarity did not remove the interferent. For this reason, it is desirable to reduce the operating potential to below that required to oxidise the interferent. In order to achieve this objective, two potentially useful enzyme substrates, 1-naphthyl phosphate (1-NP) and 4-aminophenyl phosphate (4-APP), may be considered. These are hydrolysed to their corresponding phenols, 1-naphthol and 4-aminophenol, on reaction with alkaline phosphatase. Both 4-APP (Tang et al., 1988; Pemberton et al., 1998; Schreiber et al., 1997 ) and 1-NP (Athey et al., 1993; Fernandez-Sanchez and Costa-Garcia, 1997 ) have been investigated previously in immunoassay systems, but no detailed comparative studies of their performance have been reported at SPCEs. The purpose of the present study was to compare the electrochemical behaviour of 1-naphthol and 4-aminophenol at bare and antibody-coated SPCEs and to determine which phenol would be the more compatible with biosensor operation. Their phosphorylated derivatives were then evaluated as substrates for use with a milk progesterone immunosensor. This paper describes the results of these studies.  2 Experimental 2.1 Chemicals and reagents Chemicals used were of AR-grade and were purchased from Merck (Poole, Dorset, UK). Water for the preparation of buffer solutions was drawn from a Milli-Q Water Purification System (Millipore UK, Watford, UK). Carbonate coating buffer (CB) comprised 0.015 mol/dm Na2 CO3  and 0.035 mol/dm3  NaHCO3  at a pH of 9.6. Diethanolamine-HCl buffer (DB; 0.1 mol/dm3 ) was adjusted to a final pH of 7.2 or 9.8. MgCl2  at a concentration of 0.01 mol/dm3  was included in pH9.8 DB as a cofactor for alkaline phosphatase. Before final dilution in DB, 4-aminophenol (Sigma-Aldrich Company, Poole, Dorset, UK) was dissolved in 0.1 mol/dm3  NaOH; 1-naphthol (Acros Organics, Loughborough, Leics, UK) was dissolved directly in DB. A polyclonal rabbit antibody (IgG fraction) against sheep IgG was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (rIg). Sheep monoclonal antibody (mAb) against progesterone (Groves et al., 1990 ) was kindly provided by Ridgeway Science Ltd. in the form of culture supernatant. A solution containing alkaline-phosphatase-labelled progesterone (AP-prog) was obtained from the same source. Unlabelled progesterone (f.wt.=314.5) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 4-APP (monosodium salt) and 1-NP were purchased from ICN Biomedicals Ltd., Thame, Oxon, UK and Acros Organics, respectively. Whole milk test samples from six different Fresian Holstein dairy cows at various stages of their oestrus cycles were obtained from Ridgeway Science Ltd. These samples were collected following agitation of the complete milking jar after morning milking of cows. One Lactab MkIII tablet (Thompson and Capper Ltd., Runcorn, Cheshire, UK) containing 30 mg potassium dichromate was added to every 25 ml milk as a preservative. Samples were then stored at 4°C where they were stable for up to 3 months. In the present study, assays were performed after 21 days of storage. Standards containing known concentrations of progesterone were prepared by dissolving progesterone in methanol at 1 mg/ml, aliquoting a known volume into a glass tube and evaporating the methanol under N2  before adding to whole milk (sampled and preserved as above) from an oestrus cow (containing <1 ng/ml progesterone). Serial dilutions were then performed in the same milk over the desired concentration range.  2.2 Biosensor preparation Carbon electrodes (3×3 mm working area) were screen-printed using code D14 ink formulation onto PVC backing card at Gwent Electronic Materials Ltd. (Mamhilad, Gwent, UK) as described elsewhere (Sprules et al., 1996 ). Individual screen-printed electrodes (SPCEs) were coated with rIg (to capture and orientate the mAb) and mAb as described previously (Hart et al., 1997 ). For these studies, a 1/20 dilution of mAb was applied to the electrodes, being chosen empirically as the highest dilution giving an optimum sigmoidal calibration plot for progesterone measured colorimetrically (see Pemberton et al., 1998 ). These are referred to as mAb-SPCEs.  2.3 Instrumentation Electrochemical procedures were carried out using an E612 VA Scanner and an E611 VA Detector (Metrohm, Herisau, Switzerland) attached to a Linseis LY18100 x –y  plotter (Recorder Laboratory Services, Sutton, Surrey, UK). A Viglen 486 Sx computer was used for simulation of cyclic voltammograms using the simulation program CVSIM (Gosser, 1993 ). The simple ‘E r ’, mechanism for a one-electron oxidation of a solution species at the working electrode was used to estimate values for k het  from simulations of the oxidation of 4-aminophenol at bare and mAb-coated SPCEs. Common electroactive species parameters were: C red =1 mM, C ox =0.0 mM, D =5×10−6  cm2 /s; and common experimental settings were: number of half cycles=2, A =0.09 cm2 , E i  =−0.3 V, E s  =+1.0 V, E f  =−0.3 V, v =0.05 vs−1 . Parameters specific for reaction at a bare SPCE were: E 0/ =−0.050 V, α =0.533 and for reaction at a mAb-coated SPCE were: E 0/ =−0.037 V, α =0.400.  2.4 Cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry Cyclic voltammetric studies were conducted using 10 ml analyte volumes in a glass voltammetric cell. Individual working SPCEs or mAb-SPCEs were used in a 3-electrode configuration in conjunction with a saturated calomel reference and platinum counter electrode. Chronoamperometric measurements were made by using individual working mAb-SPCEs, together with a saturated calomel electrode functioning as a combined counter/reference electrode in a two electrode configuration. In this way it was possible to perform measurements using a small (0.5 ml) volume of enzyme substrate solution in a conical polypropylene cell.  2.5 Electrochemical immunoassay procedure Milk samples were mixed with AP-prog solution in the ratio 3:5 (this combination gave a maximum signal:noise ratio). Eight microlitre volumes of these mixtures were added to the surface of individual mAb-SPCEs. After 30 min at room temperature (18–25°C; RT), the electrodes were washed three times in DB, pH 9.8, then placed in 0.5 ml DB, pH 9.8 or the same buffer containing 5 mmol/dm3  4-APP or 1-NP. After 5 min (a compromise between maximum enzyme activity and speed of assay for multiple samples), the working electrode potential was stepped from open circuit to +200 or +300 mV versus SCE, respectively and the peak current (i p ) response was recorded. Calibration graphs were obtained by plotting i p  values in the presence of an enzyme substrate minus background i p  values in buffer only for each known standard progesterone concentration (y -axis) against progesterone concentration (x -axis). For each unknown cow sample, a similar subtraction of the buffer blank i p  value was performed before using the calibration plot by interpolation to obtain an estimate of progesterone concentration. The relationship between readings obtained by EIA and electrochemical assays was investigated using linear regression analysis.   3 Results and discussion 3.1 Electrochemistry of 4-aminophenol, 1-naphthol and corresponding monophosphates The electrochemical behaviour of the enzyme substrates 4-APP and 1-NP, and their hydrolysis products, 4-aminophenol and 1-naphthol, was examined by cyclic voltammetry at unmodified SPCEs (Fig. 1  ). 4-Aminophenol showed well-defined oxidation and reduction peaks and the ΔE p  value indicated that the electrode reaction was quasi-reversible (Fig. 1 (a)). The anodic potential (E pa ) was well below that required for the oxidation of the corresponding monophosphate, 4-APP (Fig. 1 (b)). In contrast, 1-naphthol gave only an oxidation peak at +230 mV (Fig. 1 (c)), which could be due to the electrode reaction itself giving an electro-inactive product, or to the oxidised naphthol product undergoing an irreversible chemical reaction. 1-NP (Fig. 1 (d)) was not electrochemically active over the potential range studied. At this stage, it appeared that the anodic signals for either 4-aminophenol or 1-naphthol could be used as the basis for an immunoassay for progesterone. Further studies were therefore performed to gain a better understanding of the voltammetric behaviour of these two phenols. The cyclic voltammetric behaviour of 4-aminophenol and 1-naphthol was next compared at naked and mAb-SPCEs (Fig. 2  ). For both analytes, the presence of the antibodies increased the background oxidation signal at potentials above +0.5 V (Fig. 2 (b, d)), but the magnitude of the overall peak currents were the same as obtained at naked SPCEs (Fig. 2 (a, c)). However, in the case of 4aminophenol, the oxidation peak became broader in the presence of the antibodies and showed a small positive E p  shift (∼30 mV, Fig. 2 (a, b)). In the case of 1-naphthol, there was also a small positive E p  shift (∼10 mV) in the presence of the antibodies (Fig. 2 (c, d)). Further comparison of the electrochemistry of 4-aminophenol and 1-naphthol, at naked and mAb-coated SPCEs, was obtained by performing cyclic voltammetry at various scan rates. The relationship produced during cyclic voltammetry between peak current (i p ) and v 1/2  is described by the Randles-Sevcik equation, modified for irreversible systems:Cv 1/2  ip  =(2.99×10 5 ) ·  n(αna  )1/2 AD1/2    (Heineman and Kissinger, 1984 )  where i p =peak current (μA), n =number of electrons, αn a =electron transfer coefficient, A =working electrode area (cm2 ), D =diffusion coefficient (cm2 /s), C= bulk concentration of analyte (mmoles/ml) and v =scan rate (mV/s). Plots of i p  versus v 1/2  for both analytes at naked and mAb-SPCEs are shown in Fig. 3  . In the case of 4-aminophenol, there is evidence that the presence of the mAb results in lower i p  values at all scan rates compared with naked SPCEs (Fig. 3 (a)). These observations suggest that the mAb may slow the diffusion of 4-AP towards the electrode surface, and may combine with polyphenols to reduce the working area available for the oxidation of 4-AP. In contrast, ip values obtained for 1-naphthol at naked and mAb-SPCEs are almost superimposed for scan rates up to 200 mVs−1  (Fig. 3 (b)). This suggests that the antibody coating has little effect on the diffusional characteristics of 1-naphthol. Electron transfer coefficients (αn a ) were calculated for naked and mAb-SPCEs as described previously (Galus, 1976 ). For 4-aminophenol, these values were 0.533 and 0.400, respectively; this decrease indicates that the antibody layer partially inhibits the electron transfer step, possibly due to steric hindrance. A computer simulation program (CVSIM, Gosser, 1993 ) was used to simulate cyclic voltammograms for 4-aminophenol in order to obtain values for the electrochemical rate constant. Using the above αn a  values, it was found that the heterogeneous rate constant (k het ) for the mAb-SPCEs was 3.0×10−4 /cm s−1 , whereas k het  for a naked SPCE was calculated to be 6.5×10−4  cm s−1 . The slower rate constant obtained with the mAb-SPCEs supports the suggestion of partial inhibition discussed above. Finally, the αn a  values were calculated for 1-naphthol at naked- and mAb-SPCEs, to be 0.53 and 0.60, respectively. These values suggest that the antibody coating does not inhibit the rate of electron transfer during the oxidation of this phenol. Fig. 4  (a) shows the effect of scan rate on the anodic peak potential for 4-aminophenol, at naked and antibody-coated SPCEs. True reversible reactions do not show shifts of E p  with scan rate, inferring that the oxidation reactions at both types of SPCE appear to be quasi-reversible over the range studied. In contrast, at scan rates above 100 mVs−1 , 1-naphthol appears to show more reversible behaviour at both SPCEs than 4-aminophenol. This may be explained by a slow chemical follow-up reaction (possibly polymerisation) for 1-naphthol after the initial electron transfer step. It should also be noted that the peak potential for the oxidation of 1-naphthol obtained at the mAb-SPCE at 200 mVs−1  is +0.38 V; for 4-aminophenol at this electrode the E p  value was +0.28 V. All of the above observations using cyclic voltammetry suggested that 1-NP would be a suitable candidate for the chronoamperometric immunoassay. Although the magnitude of the anodic response was lower than that seen for 4-aminophenol at equivalent concentration, the hydrolysis product, 1-naphthol, appeared capable of producing a significant and unimpeded oxidation signal at mAb-SPCEs.  3.2 Establishing the operating potential for chronoamperometric detection of l-naphthol Previous cyclic voltammograms with SPCEs (Pemberton et al., 1998 ) have demonstrated the presence, in milk, of electroactive species capable of adsorbing onto the electrode surface and being oxidised to produce anodic signals capable of interfering with the operation of the immunosensor by chronoamperometry. Using 4-APP as enzyme substrate it was possible to select an operating potential of +200 mV, well below the potential required to oxidise adsorbed milk species (Pemberton et al., 1998 ). In order to confirm that 1-naphthol could be detected amperometrically and to establish an operating potential for use in the assay, chronoamperometric measurement of a 1 mM 1-naphthol solution was performed over a range of operating potentials at mAb-SPCEs which had been incubated with enzyme-labelled progesterone either in buffer solution or in milk. Fig. 5   shows that in order to avoid signals due to the oxidation of electroactive species within milk, it would be necessary to operate below +400 mV. It was necessary to operate at +600 mV to achieve the maximum current signal from chronoamperometry of 1-naphthol. However, it was still possible to obtain over 50% of this response at +300 mV which was therefore chosen as the operating potential for the biosensor.  3.3 Analysis of cows’ milk-comparison of enzyme substrates 4-APP and 1-NP In order to compare the performance of the immunosensor using 1-NP as an enzyme substrate with its performance using 4-APP, milk samples obtained from a number of different cows were analysed for progesterone content using both approaches. The results were then compared with those obtained using a commercial EIA (Ridgeway Science Ltd.; accuracy=±8% inter-assay C.V., sensitivity=0.6 ng/ml) by reference to a standard curve of absorbance reading versus progesterone concentration (Sauer et al., 1986 ). Fig. 6  (a) shows the calibration curve obtained using 4-APP as substrate to measure progesterone milk standards over the concentration range, 0–50 ng/ml, before and after background subtraction. Precision for triplicate sensors at each concentration ranged from 5.3 to 18.3%. The readings obtained for six cows’ milk samples, together with those obtained using the standard EIA are shown on a correlation plot for the two sets of values (Fig. 6 (b)). Reasonable agreement (r =0.840) was obtained between the two methods. One calibration curve obtained using 1-NP is shown in Fig. 7  (a), before and after adjustment for background current. Precision for triplicate sensors at each concentration was improved compared with the 4-APP assay and ranged from 4.1 to 12.4%; this may have been due to the improved solubility of the 1-naphthyl phosphate over the 4-APP. Readings obtained for the same six cows’ milk samples tested above are shown on a correlation plot comparing these values with those obtained by EIA (Fig. 7 (b)). The result was a close agreement between the two sets of readings and an improved correlation (r =0.946) over the 4-APP assay.   4 Conclusion In summary, the above results have demonstrated that by using 1-naphthyl phosphate (1-NP) as enzyme substrate, it is possible to develop an amperometric screen-printed immunosensor for milk progesterone based on the detection of the product, 1-naphthol at an operating potential of +300 mV. The required detection limit of 2–5 ng/ml (Bulman, 1979; Sauer et al., 1986 ) was achieved using this approach. Examination of the electrochemistry of 1-naphthol itself indicated that it was readily oxidisable at the surface of an SPCE in the presence or absence of immobilised antibody. This was a potential advantage over 4-aminophenol which appeared to suffer from a diffusional barrier, most probably as a result of the formation of polyphenols at the electrode surface. Although the operating potential required for oxidation of 1-naphthol was 100 mV higher than that used for the detection of 4-aminophenol, the 1-naphthol assay operated below the oxidation potential of milkborne interferents and did not suffer from a loss of sensitivity. Indeed, a closer agreement than that achieved using 4-APP was obtained with an established EIA method for milk samples taken from different cows having varying background responses. Furthermore, this correlation was also better than that obtained using 4-APP in a previous study on milk samples taken from a single animal (Pemberton et al., 1998 ). Since 1-NP is inexpensive, readily soluble and easy to obtain, the screenprinted immunosensor when used in combination with this substrate may hold promise for future development into a device for large-scale milk monitoring.   Acknowledgements The authors wish to thank R. Pittson and his staff at Gwent Electronic Materials Ltd.(GEM), Mamhilad, Gwent for supplying the SPCEs. Drs D.J. Groves and B.A. Morris from the Heterohybridoma Antibody Group, Department of Biochemistry, University of Surrey are gratefully acknowledged as the originators of the mAb. Financial support for this project was provided by the HEFCE.   
