 The biosynthesis of the vitamin biotin, a cofactor in biological carboxylation reactions, occurs in micro-organisms and plants and involves at least four different enzymes (Eisenberg, 1973; Gloeckler et al ., 1990; Baldet et al ., 1993) . Because biotin synthesis is unique to plants and microorganisms, enzymes of this pathway are potential targets for the development of antimicrobial drugs and herbicides (Rendina et al ., 1999) . One of these enzymes is 7,8-diaminopelargonic acid synthase (DAPA synthase), an aminotransferase that catalyses the antepenultimate step in this pathway: the conversion of 7-keto-8-aminopelargonic acid (KAPA) to 7,8-diaminopelargonic acid (DAPA) (Figure 1)  (Stoner & Eisenberg, 1975a) . DAPA synthase from Escherichia coli  is a homodimer with a molecular mass of 94 kDa (Stoner & Eisenberg 1975a)  and contains 429 residues per monomer (Otsuka et al ., 1988) . It is unique among aminotransferases in that it uses S -adenosyl-l -methionine (SAM) as amino group donor (Stoner & Eisenberg, 1975a) . DAPA synthase uses pyridoxal-5′-phosphate (PLP) as cofactor and hence belongs to the family of vitamin B6 -dependent aminotransferases (Stoner & Eisenberg, 1975a) . In general terms, the mechanism of vitamin B6 -dependent enzymes is rather well understood (John, 1995; Hayashi, 1995)  and it is expected that DAPA synthase follows the established overall scheme of PLP catalysis (Figure 2) .  PLP binds covalently to the active site lysine residue through a Schiff base linkage (the internal aldimine). Upon binding of SAM, the substrate for the first part of the catalytic cycle, an external aldimine is formed between the substrate and the cofactor through a transaldimination process. The reaction proceeds through deprotonation of the former Cα  carbon of the substrate, leading to the quinonoid intermediate followed by protonation of the C-4′ carbon. It has been shown for aspartate aminotransferase that the lysine residue previously covalently bound to the cofactor acts as proton acceptor and donor in these steps (Gehring, 1984; Julin et al ., 1989) . Hydrolysis of the resulting ketimine intermediate gives the keto acid of the first substrate SAM and pyridoxamine phosphate bound to the enzyme by non-covalent bonds. The second half of the catalytic cycle is in principle a reversal of the first steps. KAPA, the second substrate, binds and receives the amino group from pyridoxamine phosphate as the PLP-enzyme complex is regenerated. Thus, both substrates have to be accommodated in the same active site, despite differences in size and chemical properties. Although KAPA bears an amino group, DAPA synthase uses KAPA only as an amino group acceptor, not as an amino group donor, i.e. KAPA is not transaminated by DAPA synthase (Stoner & Eisenberg, 1975b) . The three-dimensional structures of more than 20 different PLP-dependent enzymes have been determined (for a recent review, see Jansonius 1998 ). Christen and co-workers organised PLP-dependent enzymes into three different families, α, β and γ, based on the chemical characteristics of the catalysed reaction and attempted to correlate these with amino acid sequence families (Alexander et al ., 1994) . The aminotransferases belong to the α-family, which hosts enzymes acting on the carbon atom adjacent to the amino group of the substrate. Another classification based on fold types and sequence comparisons was introduced by Grishin et al.  (1995) . So far, five different folds that can bind PLP have been observed and it has been proposed on the basis of sequence analysis that additional hitherto unknown PLP-binding folds might exist (Grishin et al ., 1995) . Most aminotransferases of known structure belong to fold type I, first described for aspartate aminotransferase (Ford et al ., 1980) . This structural family is characterised by a large domain folded into a central β-sheet, with surrounding loops and helices forming most of the PLP binding site and a smaller domain partly involved in substrate binding. Exceptions are d -amino acid aminotransferase (Sugio et al ., 1995)  and branched chain aminotransferase (Okada et al ., 1997) , which fold in a completely different manner. Sequence analysis suggested that DAPA synthase may belong to the aminotransferase subclass III of the PLP fold type I family (Metha et al ., 1993) , which includes a number of enzymes of known structure: ω-aminotransferase (Watanabe et al ., 1989) , ornithine aminotransferase (Shah et al ., 1997, Shen et al ., 1998) , 2,2-dialkylglycine decarboxylase (Toney et al ., 1993, 1995)  and glutamate semialdehyde aminomutase (Hennig et al ., 1997) . Here we report the three-dimensional structure of DAPA synthase from E. coli  at 1.8 Å resolution. The structure analysis reveals that this enzyme indeed is a member of the aspartate aminotransferase family of vitamin B6 -dependent enzymes. A multiple structure alignment suggests that at least six subclasses, which are structurally and evolutionary closely related, exist in this family. Furthermore, the structure of a ternary complex of DAPA synthase with the substrate KAPA, bound to the PLP form of the enzyme, is presented. This structure forms the basis for mechanistic considerations, in particular with respect to substrate recognition.  Results Structure determination The structure of DAPA synthase was determined to 1.8 Å resolution. Despite non-isomorphism between crystals of DAPA synthase, two heavy-atom derivatives containing mercury and platinum, respectively, were identified after extensive screening. However, the phases derived from these derivatives were not of sufficient quality to allow tracing of the polypeptide chain. Therefore multiple anomalous dispersion techniques, using mercury-derivatised crystals were employed to obtain phase information (for data collection and phasing statistics see Table 1 ).  The initial map at 2.0 Å resolution, calculated after solvent flattening and 2-fold non-crystallographic averaging, was of excellent quality (Figure 3(a))   and the polypeptide chain could be readily built into the electron density. After a few refinement cycles, most of the side-chains had been assigned. However, native crystals diffracted to higher resolution (1.8 Å) and it was desirable to use these data for the refinement. Because of the non-isomorphism between crystals, molecular replacement was necessary for finding the correct orientation of the molecule in the native crystal. The solution was verified by strong and well defined density for the cofactor, PLP, which had been excluded from the search model. Two-fold non-crystallographic symmetry was applied in the subsequent refinement, but released in the very last stages causing a slight drop in the free R -value. Figure 3(b)  shows a part of the final 2F o −F c  electron density map, with the refined model superimposed. The final model contains all but one residue, 556 water molecules, two PLP molecules covalently linked to Lys274 in each chain and two Na+ . Only the backbone is modelled for the C-terminal residue in both chains (Glu429), since the side-chains were disordered. The side-chains in the loop region between residues 180 and 192 are badly ordered, and in one of the monomers residue 183 is not included in the model, since no electron density corresponding to its main-chain atoms was observed. In both chains residue Trp14, which is positioned in the interior of the protein, was built as a leucine residue, judged by the electron density and the local environment of the side-chain. This replacement was later supported by N-terminal amino acid sequencing. The model was refined to a final R -factor of 17.5 % and a free R -factor of 22.6 %. A summary of the refinement statistics is shown in Table 2 .  Two residues, Trp53 and Ile213, which both are well defined in the electron density map, appear in the disallowed region of the Ramachandran plot for each subunit. Trp53 is involved in substrate binding and Ile213 is found at a sharp turn in the beginning of a β-strand that takes the chain into the cofactor binding region.  The structure of the monomer The monomer of DAPA synthase consists of two domains (Figure 4(a)) ,  a small domain comprising the N-and C-terminal parts of the polypeptide chain (residues 1–49 and 330–429) and a large domain formed by the intervening residues containing the cofactor binding site. A topological description of the structure of DAPA synthase is presented in Figure 4(b) . The large domain starts with a helix-loop-helix segment formed by helices α2 and α3, which takes the chain over the surface of the molecule to the beginning of a seven-stranded β-sheet, the central feature of this domain, which is typical of aminotransferases (Ford et al ., 1980) . The order of the strands is β4, β10, β9, β8, β7, β5 and β6, where all except β10 are parallel to each other. Towards the exterior of the molecule the sheet is covered by two helices, α5 and α6, and the loop between strands β8 and β9. The sheet is further shielded from the solvent by helices α3 and α8, which pack almost perpendicular to the strands in the β-sheet. Helix α4 and the extended loop between β5 and β6 pack against the sheet on the opposite side and are involved in subunit-subunit interactions. Helices α7-α8 form a helix-loop-helix segment, which follows after the seven-stranded β-sheet and completes the large domain. The C-terminal part of the small domain folds into a β-sheet which is packed against three helices α9, α10 and α11, on one side. The other side of the sheet is turned against the large domain, so that a crevice is formed between the two domains, which accommodates the active site. The N-terminal part of the small domain starts with an α-helix followed by three short β-strands, β1, β2 and β3, folded into an anti-parallel β-sheet, and then proceeds into the large domain via  a connecting peptide segment. This β-sheet is positioned between the C-terminal part of the small domain and the large domain and provides one wall of the active site. The N-terminal β-sheet is extended by a very short strand, created by residues located between strand β13 and helix α10 in the C-terminal part of the domain. Following this interaction the polypeptide chain proceeds back into the C-terminal part of the small domain, extending its β-sheet by a short anti-parallel β-strand interaction to strand β13 (Figure 4(b)) . Most of the interactions between the C-terminal part of the small domain and the large domain involve strand β11, the loop following that strand and the loop between β13 and α11. Arg360 in strand β11 interacts through its side-chain with the main-chain carbonyl groups of residues Gly219 and Met220, situated in the loop region between β7 and α6 in the large domain. Arg253 in the large domain interacts via  its side-chain with the main-chain carbonyl oxygen atoms of Pro401 found between strand β13 and helix α11, and Ala364 between strands β11 and β12. It is also hydrogen bonded through its main-chain carbonyl oxygen atom to the phenolic hydroxyl group of Tyr403. Ile56, found in the domain interconnection region, provides a main-chain-main-chain interaction with Tyr403 in the small domain. Finally, the side-chain hydroxyl group of Tyr403 is within hydrogen bonding distance of the main-chain carbonyl oxygen atom of Phe251 in the loop between β8 and β9. All residues involved in this interface except Tyr403 and Ala364 are either conserved or invariant within the DAPA synthases (Figure 4(c)) . The domain-domain interface between the N-terminal part of the small domain and the large domain involves hydrogen bond interactions between the main-chain atoms of the C-terminal residues of strand β1, Ala32 and Gly34, and main-chain atoms of Tyr59 and the side-chain of Asn60, which precede helix α2 in the large domain. Tyr17, located in the loop between α1 and β1, is hydrogen-bonded through its phenolic oxygen to the side-chain of Asp147, which is part of the extended loop between strands β5 and β6 of the large domain. Furthermore, two of the residues involved in the domain interconnection, Ser50 and Trp53, interact through the side-chain hydroxyl and main-chain carbonyl oxygen atom, respectively, with the guanidinium group of Arg253 located between strands β8 and β9. These three residues and Gly34 are invariant throughout the sequenced DAPA synthases (Figure 4(c)) .  The DAPA synthase dimer In the crystal, a homodimer of DAPA synthase (Figure 5)   is found with the subunits related by a 2-fold non-crystallographic axis. This finding is consistent with solution studies that showed that DAPA synthase is active in dimeric form (Stoner & Eisenberg, 1975a) . Upon dimerisation, an area of 5240 Å2  per subunit is buried, which corresponds to 27 % of the total solvent-accessible area. The overall dimension of the dimer is 85 Å× 60 Å×60 Å. Both subunits are involved in building up the two identical active sites of the DAPA synthase dimer, which are positioned approximately 20 Å apart. The pattern of subunit-subunit interactions is extensive and residues from both domains are involved in these interactions. In the large domain helix α2 lines up with and packs against α2 from the other monomer, and both form the top of the molecule, as shown in Figure 5 . The extended loop following helix α2 protrudes into the neighbouring subunit, forming several strong interactions with loop regions from both domains of that subunit. Helix α3, which covers the central β-sheet of its own subunit, interacts with residues from the N-terminal part of the small domain from the other subunit. Helix α4 and the loop between β5 and β6, which protrude from the central β-sheet region, pack against the corresponding residues in the second monomer at an angle of approximately 90°, mainly through hydrophobic interactions. Furthermore, the top end of this part of the sheet involving strands β4, β10 and β11, including PLP binding residue Lys274, and connecting loops form interactions with the other subunit of DAPA synthase, in particular with helices α7 and α8. Dimer interactions formed by the small domain are almost exclusively made up of the N-terminal part in which the N-terminal helix and the following loop folds over the surface of the second monomer. The loop between helix α2 and α3 is of central importance for the subunit-subunit interactions. It interacts with residues located in helix α1, in the loop between helix α1 and strand β1, in strand β1, in the domain interconnection region, in the loop between strands β9 and β10, and in the loop between helix α10 and strand β13 of the second subunit.  The pyridoxal-5′-phosphate binding site The electron density for the cofactor is very well defined and shows clearly that PLP is covalently bound to the active site Lys274 (Figure 3(b)) . The PLP binding site is located between the two domains of the monomer at the interface of the two subunits (Figure 6) .  Residues from both subunits are involved in cofactor binding, although each active site cleft is mainly made up of one monomer. The lysine residue covalently attached to PLP is located on the loop between strands β9 and β10, and points towards the interior of the protein so that PLP is found on the side of the β-sheet facing the second subunit in the dimer. The cofactor is bound at the bottom of the active site, with its re  side facing the solvent. The oxygen atoms of the phosphate group interact with the main-chain amides of Gly112 and Ser113, and the side-chain of Ser113, located at the N terminus of helix α4, thus anchoring PLP firmly to the enzyme. The negative charges on the phosphate oxygen atoms are partly neutralised by the positive dipole charge of helix α4. Further, Thr309 from the other subunit forms a hydrogen bond interaction through its main-chain amide to one of the phosphate oxygen atoms. Several well ordered water molecules within hydrogen bond distance of the phosphate oxygen atoms are also found in the active site of the holo-enzyme. The carboxyl group of Asp245 is within hydrogen bonding distance of the pyridine nitrogen. This indicates either that the carboxyl side-chain is protonated and can form a hydrogen bond to the nitrogen atom or that this nitrogen is protonated. The aspartic acid side-chain is kept in place by interactions with the main-chain amide of residue Ile247 and with the side-chain of His145. No direct interactions with protein atoms are found for the phenolic hydroxyl group, O-3′, of the cofactor. There are, however, water-mediated contacts to the side-chain of Glu211 and the main-chain amide of Ala217. The pyridine ring of PLP is sandwiched between the side-chain of Tyr144 protruding from the active site, which stacks perpendicular to the ring, and Ile247, which provides support from the si  side of the ring facing the protein.  Binding of the substrate KAPA The electron density map for the ternary complex was continuous except for a few disordered loop regions at the surface of the molecule. These regions comprise residues 160–168 and 300–301 in each subunit with no electron density for the backbone. As in the crystals of the holoenzyme, the loop comprising residues 180–192 has weak electron density, with disordered side-chains for residues 180–192 and no electron density for the backbone of residues 183–184. The C-terminal residue was not modelled because of very weak electron density. The stereochemistry of the refined model is reasonable (Table 2) . The Ramachandran plot showed one outlier, residue Ile213, with well defined electron density. This residue is also found in the disallowed region of the Ramachandran plot for the model of the holoenzyme. The most characteristic feature of the initial electron density map for the ternary complex was the clear and well defined difference electron density in the active site close to the PLP molecule. A KAPA molecule could be modelled straightforwardly into this difference density. Refinement gave similar B -factors for the atoms of the substrate to those for surrounding protein atoms, indicating high occupancy of the substrate in the active site. The initial difference electron density for bound KAPA is shown in Figure 3(c) . The substrate is bound in a rather bent fashion in the active site cleft, with the carboxyl tail close to the entrance of the cleft and the polar head group close to the re  face of the cofactor at the bottom of the active site (Figure 7) .  The polar head/tail groups anchor the substrate to the protein through salt bridges and hydrogen bonds, while the hydrophobic carbon chain packs with hydrophobic amino acid side-chains in the active site pocket. The carboxyl group of KAPA forms a salt bridge with the side-chain of the invariant Arg391. One of the oxygen atoms of this carboxyl groups is also within hydrogen bonding distance of the Nϵ  atom of the side-chain of Trp52. The aliphatic carbon atoms of the KAPA molecule form van der Waals’ interactions with the side-chains of residues Tyr17, Trp53, Tyr144 and Phe393. The 7-keto oxygen atom of KAPA forms a hydrogen bond to the Nϵ  atom of Lys274, which is covalently linked to the PLP in this ternary complex. The N8 nitrogen atom of the substrate is held in position through hydrogen bonds formed to the hydroxyl group of Tyr17, and the peptide oxygen of Gly307. The terminal methyl group of KAPA forms a hydrophobic contact with the side-chain of Trp52. Very few significant conformational changes occur upon binding of the substrate. The largest changes involve only side-chain movements. They include the side-chain of Tyr17, which shifts towards the KAPA substrate. The guanidinium group of the side-chain of Arg391 moves about 3 Å in order to form a tight salt bridge to the carboxyl group of KAPA. The most pronounced conformational change involves the side-chain of Trp53, which adopts a position perpendicular to its location in the unliganded protein. This conformational change has as a consequence that this residue, which had been one of the outliers in the Ramachandran plot for the holoenzyme, is now located in a favourable region of the Ramachandran plot.  The metal binding site A strong peak in electron density (11 times the standard deviation of a F o −F c  electron density map) was found located close to a tight turn between helix α3 and strand β4, formed by residues 96 to 100. Observed distances to surrounding protein atoms (2.3 to 2.6 Å) were not consistent with a water molecule in this position. On the basis of peak height, ligand distance and geometry, this difference density was modelled as a sodium ion. Binding of a potassium ion at this site was excluded, since it is not present in the crystallisation solution, whereas sodium is present in high concentration as a buffer counterion (>50 mM). The ligands to the Na+  form a close to octahedral coordination sphere, with oxygen atoms provided by main-chain carbonyl groups of residues Val96, Thr99, Pro100 and Leu103 (Figure 8) .  Additional ligands are the side-chain of Thr99 and a water molecule. Binding sites for monovalent metal ions have been observed in other vitamin B6 -dependent enzymes, for instance 2,2-dialkylglycine decarboxylase (Toney et al ., 1993, 1995)  and tryptophanase (Isupov et al ., 1998) . The metal binding site observed in DAPA synthase is identical to site II in the decarboxylase, with the same set of ligands, four carbonyl oxygen atoms, a threonine side-chain and a water molecule. Because this metal binding site is remote from the active site (>20 Å), its role is likely to be structural rather than catalytic.  Crystal packing DAPA synthase crystals grown under the same conditions occur in two space groups, C 2 and P 21 , with cell dimensions a =130 Å, b =57.5 Å, c =117 Å and β=110°, and a =58.5 Å, b =55.6 Å, c =117 Å and β=96.9°, respectively (Käck et al ., 1998) . It was evident that the two space groups were closely related as the crystal lattice could change from C 2 to P 21  during data collection. This transition can be triggered by cooling the crystal from room temperature to 4°C. Further, the native Patterson map obtained from the P 21  crystals had two peaks very close to (1/2,1/2,1/2), indicating a pseudo symmetry in the packing pattern (Käck et al ., 1998) . A slight rearrangement of the molecules in the crystal disrupts the perfect alignment between the 2-fold molecular axes relating the monomers and the crystallographic dyad and shifts its positions from exactly (1/4, y , 0) and (3/4, y , 0), resulting in a change from space group C 2 to P 21 (Figure 9) .  The relationship between the two space groups can be described as X C 2= −X P 21 −Z P 21 , Y C 2=Y P 21 , Z C 2=2X P 21 .   Discussion Structural relationships between vitamin B6  enzymes of fold type I In order to analyse structural relationships within the PLP fold type I family, a general search of the Protein Data Bank for PLP-dependent enzymes topologically similar to DAPA synthase was performed, followed by a multiple structural alignment between these (see Materials and Methods for details). Ten different enzymes aligned with DAPA synthase (Table 3) .  The pairwise amino acid identities of structurally aligned elements are presented in Table 4 .  Furthermore, the relationships based on the structural similarities between these enzymes are presented in Figure 10(a)   (see Materials and Methods for details). Although the enzymes in the fold type I class of the vitamin B6  enzyme superfamily share the same overall fold, only five elements of secondary structure could be structurally aligned between all of them. These elements correspond to strands β4, β6, β7, β8 and β9, as defined for DAPA synthase Figure 10(b) . A slight difference in the twist of the sheet in the different enzymes prevents alignment of the two outmost strands of the sheet, even though they are present in all structures. Genuinely different areas are loops involved in substrate binding and subunit-subunit interactions. According to the multiple structural alignment these 11 enzymes can be divided into six different subclasses (Figure 10(a)  and Table 3 ). The largest subclass includes DAPA synthase, 2,2-dialkylglycine decarboxylase, glutamate semialdehyde aminomutase and human ornithine aminotransferase, and corresponds to aminotransferases subclass III in Grishin’s classification (Grishin et al ., 1995) . Aromatic amino acid aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase make up the members of aminotransferases subclass I, and phosphoserine aminotransferase is the only representative of the aminotransferase subclass V. There are no coordinates released in the PDB database for enzymes that might belong to aminotransferase subclass II as defined by Grishin et al . (1995) . A structure-based classification of the fold type I enzymes outside the aminotransferase subclasses had not been addressed earlier. In our comparison, tyrosine phenol-lyase and tryptophan indole-lyase form a distinct class (the tyrosine phenol-lyase subclass). Cystathionine β-lyase shows sequence identities in the range of 26 % to 32 % to metathione γ-lyase, cystathionine γ-lyase, O -acetyl-l -homoserine sulfhydrylase, O -succinylhomoserine sulphfhydrylase, and cystathionine γ-synthase, indicating that they belong to the same structural subclass (the cystathionine β-lyase subclass). The larger prokaryotic ornithine decarboxylase is the sole representative of its subclass so far. There is a striking correlation between the structure of the N-terminal part of the polypeptide chain and the subclass definition obtained from the multiple structure alignment within this family. The structure of this chain segment is rather different between the subclasses, but similar within a given subclass (Figure 11) .  For instance, the N-terminal β-meander followed by a helix as described for DAPA synthase holds for all enzymes in subclass III (Figure 11(a)) . In the tyrosine phenol-lyase subclass a helix folds over the hinge region and covers one end of the C-terminal β-sheet. This leaves the entrance to the active site more open than in the subclass III enzymes. An N-terminal arm extends outside the catalytic dimer and is involved in a four-stranded (-sheet built up by two strands from each subunit mediating tetramer formation (Antson et al ., 1993) (Figure 11(b)) . In cystathionine-β-lyase (Figure 11(c))  the N-terminus protrudes out from the monomer into the active site of the other monomer in the catalytic dimer and then turns back and folds into an α-helix which packs against the outside of the hinge between the domains in its original subunit. Some of the residues in the N-terminal segment are also involved in tetramer formation. In the aspartate aminotransferase and aromatic amino acid aminotransferase the N terminus starts on the surface of the second subunit and then crosses over the active site cleft before joining the small domain. The N-terminal part of the small domain forms an α-helix which lines the active site entrance and contributes with a β-strand interaction to the C-terminal β-sheet (Figure 11(d)) . Ornithine decarboxylase is a larger PLP-dependent enzyme of which only parts, domain three and domain four, correspond to the fold type I enzymes. The small domain is built up solely by domain four, corresponding to the C-terminal part of the small domain in the smaller fold type I enzymes. The N-terminal domains consist of one independently folded domain followed by a long linker connecting it to the PLP binding domain three (Figure 11(f)) . Finally, the subclass V enzymes seem to lack the N-terminal domain completely. The polypeptide chain starts at the domain linker region and enters the large domain directly (Figure 11(e)) .  The active site: similarities and differences in the fold type I enzymes The active site and in particular the pyridine ring of the PLP cofactor of the fold type I enzymes of known 3-D structure superpose very well (Figure 12) .  The maximum distance from the Schiff-base nitrogen atom in DAPA synthase to the corresponding atom of related enzymes is 1.4 Å (ornithine decarboxylase and phosphoserine amino transferase), and that for the pyridine nitrogen is 1.4 Å (phosphoserine amino transferase). The residues participating in binding of the cofactor are presented in Table 5 .  It is notable that, despite the similar position of the cofactor in the active site (Figure 12) , the loop between strands β9 and β10 carrying the active site lysine residue is not structurally conserved. In all aminotransferase subclass III enzymes this loop is shorter, with the consequence that the lysine residue is positioned out of register with the corresponding lysine in the enzymes belonging to the other subclasses (Figure 12) . This suggests a deletion of one amino acid in the ancestral subclass III aminotransferase. The Nϵ  atom of the lysine side-chain, however, is found at approximately the same position. The aspartic acid residue which corresponds to Asp245 in DAPA synthase is the only structurally conserved residue in this enzyme family. This amino acid forms a salt bridge/hydrogen bond with the pyridine nitrogen and was proposed to provide one of the key interactions for the regulation of the pK a  of the aldimine nitrogen (Hayashi, 1995; John, 1995) . Stabilisation of this interaction is provided by a non-conserved pattern of hydrogen bonds to surrounding residues, except in the case of ornithine decarboxylase and tryptophanase in which the aspartic acid only interacts with the pyridine nitrogen of PLP. In DAPA synthase, glutamate semialdehyde aminomutase and dialkylglycine decarboxylase a histidine residue forms a hydrogen bond to one of the carboxyl oxygen atoms of the aspartic acid. Similar interactions are provided by a histidine from a different loop in the aspartate and aromatic amino acid aminotransferases. In the subclass III and V enzymes, the main-chain amide of the second residue following the aspartic acid is within hydrogen bonding distance (<3.3 Å) to the carboxyl group of this aspartic acid whereas in cystathionine β-lyase, phosphoserine aminotransferase and tyrosine phenol-lyase the side-chain of this residue (Thr/Ser) provides an interaction with the same group. In all enzymes except DAPA synthase, the protein provides a hydrogen bond partner to the phenolic oxygen, O-3′, of the pyridine ring. The nature and strength of this interaction might influence the pK a  of the resulting Schiff base of the cofactor with the catalytic lysine residue (Goldberg et al ., 1991; Inoue et al ., 1991) . As described, a water-mediated interaction with a glutamic acid residue replaces this interaction in DAPA synthase. A structural feature distinguishing the subclass III aminotransferases from other fold type I PLP enzymes is the stacking interactions with the re  face of the pyridine ring of PLP. All enzymes of known structure have aromatic residues in this position, corresponding to Tyr144 in DAPA synthase. However, in the subclass III aminotransferases the aromatic residue packs nearly perpendicular to the pyridine ring of the cofactor, while in the other fold type I enzymes the stacking is close to parallel. It has been proposed for aspartate aminotransferase that the parallel stacking, which is optimised from nearly parallel to parallel in the external aldimine complex, increases the electron withdrawing effect of the cofactor and favours the formation of the quinonoid intermediate (Ford et al ., 1980; Hayashi et al ., 1990) . In the aminotransferase subclass III enzymes, the stacking residue is part of the loop between strands β5 and β6, which narrows the active site entrance. With this conformation of the polypeptide backbone, the aromatic residue would clash with the main chain if it packed parallel to the ring. In the other fold type I enzymes the loop is replaced by a short helix beginning immediately after the aromatic residue. This difference in backbone conformation enables a parallel stacking to the pyridine ring of the cofactor and leaves the active site much more open. In tryptophanase, cystathionine β-lyase and tyrosine phenol-lyase the active site entrance is instead restricted by a loop protruding from the β-sheet in the small domain whereas the other enzymes simply have a wider active site entrance. Human ornithine decarboxylase is an exception, having an extra C-terminal domain packing against the active site cleft. There are two distinct positions of the phosphate group of PLP; one for the subclass I aminotransferases and one for all the others fold type I PLP enzymes (Figure 12) . This is caused by interactions of phosphate oxygen atoms with an arginine residue (Arg266 in aspartate aminotransferase) which result in a different tilt of the cofactor in aspartate and aromatic amino acid aminotransferases in relation to the other fold type I enzymes.  Substrate recognition In order to locate the active site in DAPA synthase, the crystal structure of a ternary complex of the enzyme with PLP and KAPA was determined (Figure 7) . This complex is unproductive, since it combines the PLP form of the cofactor with the amino group acceptor KAPA, which in the catalytic reaction reacts with the pyridoxamine form of the enzyme. Since KAPA is an amino acid, the question arises as to why it does not act as amino donor in the reaction, i.e. react with the PLP form of the enzyme. The structure of the ternary complex provides an immediate answer. In order to react with the C-4′ carbon atom of the cofactor to form the internal aldimine, the N8 amino group of KAPA must bind very closely to this part of the cofactor in an orientation favourable for the reaction to occur. In the complex, the N8 amino group is bound tightly to protein main-chain and side-chain atoms in such a manner that it points away from the internal aldimine group, thus preventing transamination (Figure 7) . The observed binding of KAPA does however position the seven-carbon atom of KAPA close to the aldimine and thereby facilitates transfer of an amino group to this carbon atom, which would yield the product, 7,8-diaminopelargonic acid. An important conclusion to be drawn from the structure of the ternary complex is that in DAPA synthase, as opposed to other enzymes of this class of vitamin B6 -dependent enzymes, no domain-domain rotation occurs upon substrate binding. The absence of such large-scale conformational changes is not unique for DAPA synthase but has also been shown for another enzyme in this family, human ornithine aminotransferase (Shah et al ., 1997) . The substrate reacting with the PLP form of the enzyme is SAM and the active site, as seen in the holoenzyme should therefore be poised to bind SAM. The outer part of the active site pocket is quite open and there are several areas which could provide hydrophobic interactions with the adenine ring and still leave space for the sugar moiety. Therefore, modelling the binding site of SAM in DAPA synthase is highly speculative and a reliable model for the enzyme-PLP-SAM complex will have to await a crystal structure determination. A more detailed discussion of the reaction mechanism of DAPA synthase will require structural information from this and other complexes along the reaction pathway, in combination with the results from site-directed mutagenesis experiments.   Materials and methods Crystallisation DAPA synthase was expressed, purified and crystallised as described (Käck et al ., 1998) , with one modification in the crystallisation protocol. After one week of equilibration, micro-seeding was employed to increase the reproducibility of crystal formation. At the same time, 20–40 μl of 4 M sodium chloride was added to the well solution. Crystals of the ternary complex DAPA synthase-PLP-KAPA were prepared by soaking crystals of the holoenzyme overnight in 5 mM KAPA, 25 % PEG-4000, 20 % MPD, 100 mM Hepes (pH 7.5). The substrate KAPA was synthesised as described (Nudelman et al ., 1998) .  Data collection, phasing and model building The cell dimensions differed slightly between crystals, reflecting non-isomorphism between crystals. A large number of different heavy atoms were screened in order to find a useful derivative. Finally, crystals soaked for 24 hours at 4°C in 25 % polyethylene glycol 4000, 22 % 2-methyl-2,4 pentanediol and 5 mM ethyl mercury thiosalicylate (EMTS) or K2 Pt(NO2 )4  at pH 7.5 were isomorphous enough to allow identification of the heavy-atom sites. However, neither the multiple isomorphous replacement electron density map nor the 2-fold averaged electron density map was interpretable. Multiple anomalous difference data were therefore collected on a EMTS-soaked crystal with cell dimensions a =58.50 Å, b =56.63 Å, c =121.7 Å and β=96.14°, space group P 21 , at beamline BM 14 at the ESRF in Grenoble. Data were collected at three different wavelengths, λ1 (peak)=0.9918 Å, λ2 (inflection point)=1.007 Å and λ3 (high energy remote)=0.8265 Å at 100 K to 2.0 Å resolution. Data processing and scaling were performed with the programs Denzo and Scalepack (Otwinowski, 1993) . Eight mercury sites were identified by visual inspection of the difference Patterson maps and using difference Fourier methods (for phasing statistics see Table 1 ). The five strongest peaks coincided with the binding sites determined earlier, while three minor sites differed in their positions, compared to those previously derived. A map calculated after refinement of the parameters of the mercury positions using mlphare (Otwinowski, 1991)  and solvent flattening by DM (Cowtan & Main, 1996)  was of excellent quality, and backbone tracing and sequence assignment (Otsuka et al ., 1988)  were straighforward for the whole protein except for two mobile regions containing residues 160 to 183 and 298 to 304, respectively; 2-fold averaging did not improve the map significantly. The model was refined using XPLOR (Brünger et al ., 1987)  with NCS constraints to R free =35.9 % and R =30.4 % without including mercury atoms. A native data set was collected using a 300 mm MAR image plate detector (MAR research Hamburg) at beam line X11 at EMBL in Hamburg to 1.8 Å resolution (for data collection statistics see Table 1 ). The cell-dimensions of this crystal were a =58.3 Å, b =55.6 Å, c =120.9 Å and β=97.0°, space group P 21 . Diffraction data for the ternary complex DAPA synthase-PLP-KAPA were collected at 100 K to 2.7 Å on a Mar Research image plate mounted on a Rikagu rotating anode operating at 50 kV and 90 mA. Data were processed and scaled using Denzo and Scalepack software package (Otwinowski, 1993) . Data collection statistics are given in Table 1 . The cell-dimensions of this crystal were a =58.0 Å, b =55.9 Å, c =120.8 Å and β=95.7°.  Refinement Because of non-isomorphism between the crystals, molecular replacement had to be used in order to find the position of the native enzyme in the unit cell. The program AMORE (Navaza, 1994)  was used for this task with the dimer as the search molecule. Before refinement, the same set of reflections (in total 5 % of the reflection data) were set aside to monitor R free . The top solution (correlation coefficient=76.7 %) gave an R free  of 37.5 % after an initial rigid body refinement to 2.5 Å resolution using the program XPLOR (Brünger et al ., 1987) . A clear and strong difference density was found at the position of the cofactor, PLP, which had not been included in the model, confirming that this was the correct solution. After rigid body refinement the structure was rebuilt using the program O (Jones et al ., 1991)  and refined using the maximum likelihood method as implemented in Refmac (Murshudov et al ., 1997)  with strong NCS restraints giving R =35.4 % and R free =36.4 % after the first round of refinement. On the basis of a sigma-weighted electron density map calculated subsequently, residues 162-180 and residues 298-303 missing from the previous model could be modelled. After the second round of refinement PLP was included in the model. In subsequent refinement runs the loop region between residue 181 and 191 was built. In one of the subunits residue 183 is still not included in the final model. Eighty water molecules were included after each refinement cycle using the program arp (Lamzin & Wilson, 1993) , resulting in a final number of 556 water molecules of which about two thirds follow the NCS. All solvent sites were inspected manually. Non-crystallographic restraints were used until the last stages of the refinement, their release resulted in a slight drop of the free R  value. The quality of the final model was assessed with PROCHECK (Laskowski et al ., 1993) . The structure of the ternary complex was determined to 2.7 Å by difference Fourier methods. Initial phases were calculated from the refined model of the holoenzyme, with the water molecules and the sodium ions excluded. A KAPA molecule was fitted into the difference electron density found in the active site close to the PLP cofactor; 5 % of the reflection data were excluded from the refinement and used to calculate the free R  value. The model of the ternary complex was refined using Refmac (Murshudov et al ., 1997) , starting in the first cycle as a rigid body refinement. Cycles of refinement were followed by manual intervention using the graphics program O (Jones et al ., 1991) . The final model contains 94 water molecules and two sodium ions, refinement statistics are given in Table 2 .  Structural alignments and database searches The program TOP (Lu, 1996)  was used for searching the Protein Data Bank with the large domain of the refined model of DAPA synthase as probe and for subsequent superpositions. Exclusion of mutant structures and complexes resulted in 15 different PLP enzymes with identical topology. Five of these were structures of aspartate aminotransferases from different sources. As these enzymes are very similar, only one of these, the E. coli  enzyme, was included in the subsequent multiple structure alignment. For the same reason, only one of the two structures of phosphoserine aminotransferase, deposited in the Protein Data Bank was used in the following multiple structural alignment. Generally, the internal aldimine form of the enzymes was used in this comparison. The domain-domain orientation as compared with DAPA synthase varies substantially between different enzymes, from 27° rotation for aspartate aminotransferase to 6° rotation for ornithine aminotransferase. In order to extend the structural alignment and comparison to the whole subunit of these enzymes, a second topological alignment was carried out using the small domain of DAPA synthase as search model. The superposed large and small domains were then artificially connected with the same rotation as in DAPA synthase. This set of enzyme models formed the basis for the multiple structural alignment using the program MAPS (G. Lu, unpublished). In this program, an initial alignment is carried out using the same algorithm as in TOP (Lu, 1996) . The program then proceeds by minimising a target function made up by the sum of pairwise distances between equivalent Cα  atoms. Segments identified as structurally equivalent must fulfil certain criteria: (i) consist of at least three consecutive residues; (ii) the distance between aligned Cα —Cα  atoms should not exceed 3.8 Å; and (iii) the side-chain should point in a similar direction (the angles formed by the Cα —Cβ  bond between equivalent residues should not exceed 50°). The result of the multiple alignment is presented in terms of aligned residues between all proteins and an alignment score of r.m.s./(N match /N average )a   (structure diversity factor), where a  is chosen empirically as 1.5. The structure diversity score can be used to illustrate the structural and possibly evolutionary relationships between the aligned enzymes.  Protein data bank accession Number The atomic coordinates and observed structure factor amplitudes have been deposited with the Protein Data Bank, Brookhaven, with accession codes 1qj5, 1qj5sf for the enzyme-PLP and 1qj3, r1qj3sf for the enzyme-PLP-KAPA complex, respectively.    Acknowledgements We thank Ivan M. Turner Sr for excellent technical assistance and Tom Milller for carrying out the N-terminal sequencing. We acknowledge access to synchrotron radiation at the ESRF, Grenoble, France, and thank Dr Andy Thompson at beamline BM14 for assistance and advice with data collection. We also acknowledge access to beamline X11, EMBL outstation, c/o DESY, Hamburg. This work was supported by the Swedish Agricultural Research Council and the Swedish Natural Science Research Council.   
