 Humans are continuously exposed to a wide variety of xenobiotics either voluntarily or from environmental exposure. Pesticides represent a high volume of widely used, environmental chemicals and there is a continuous debate concerning their possible role in many chronic, human health conditions including cancer. Hence, a great deal of studies were carried out to evaluate their possible effects on the population in general and on the environment. Dithianon (DT) (5,10-dihydro-5,10-dioxo-naphto-[2,3b ]-p -dithio-2,3-dicarbonitrile), a non-chlorinated quinone derivative (Fig. 1 ) , is a protective fungicide mainly used against apple and pear scab and leaf spot on cherry trees [1] . Toxicological data on this fungicide are lacking and only a little information about its toxicity, mutagenicity and embryotoxicity has been reported in literature [2] . Even though a short-term test of DT mutagenicity showed negative results on microbial systems [3]  and the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR) (1992) concluded that the chemical was not carcinogenic, it could induce in vitro cell transformation on BALB/c 3T3 cells [4] , indicating a possible promoting effect of this pesticide. These data indicate that DT could exert a co-carcinogenic action through epigenetic mechanisms. A number of investigators have suggested that tumorigenesis can be mediated by non-genotoxic mechanisms, of which the most representative are the following: unspecific toxic effects from administration of high doses (MTD) of the compound, leading to cell death, and therefore, to subsequent stimulation of mitosis [5] ; increase of tubular concentration of the protein α2 microglobulin and disruption of calcium reabsorption in renal tumours [5] ; facilitation of biliary clearance of thyroid hormone T4, with increased incidences of TSH production, thyroid hypertrophy, hyperplasia and probably tumours [6] ; increase of peroxisome proliferation in rodent liver [7] ; promotion and induction regulation of cell proliferation [8,9] ; pleiotropic response, oxidative stress, co-carcinogenesis and promotion all correlated with CYP induction [10–16] . Thus, the outstanding problems faced in the prediction of potential carcinogens, being mainly toxicologically non-genetic [17] , prompted us to investigate the toxicological effects at metabolic level. Many chemicals are unique for their ability to affect a wide range of CYP isoforms belonging to different families and subfamilies. In our laboratories we are interested in the study of certain toxicological effects derived by the modulation of CYP-associated activities, the most important apparatus involved in phase-I biotransformation of xenobiotics (drugs and environmental pollutants). CYP changes, altering the overall metabolic status (activation/detoxication ratio), can affect the disposition of other compounds in specific organs [10,12,18] , as well as exert co-carcinogenic and promoting effects [13,15] . Here, the ability of DT to affect various microsomal monooxygenases in murine liver, kidney and lung was studied, using the regio- and stereo-selective hydroxylation of testosterone as a multibiomarker of effect [19] .  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Chemicals NADP+ , 16α-hydroxytestosterone (16α-TH), corticosterone, testosterone and 4-androsten-3,17-dione (17-TH) were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO); glucose 6-phosphate and glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase from Boehringer-Mannheim (Germany), HPLC grade methanol, tetrahydrofuran and dichloromethane from BDH (Pooley, UK); 7α-, 6β- and 16β-hydroxytestosterone from Steraloids (Wilton, NH); 6α-, 2α- and 2β-hydroxytestosterone were generous gifts from Dr. P.G. Gervasi (CNR Pisa, Italy); DT (5,10-dihydro-5,10-dioxo-naphtho-[2,3b ]-p -dithio-2,3-dicarbonitrile) chemical purity 99.6%, was purchased from Lab Service (Bologna, Italy); rabbit polyclonal antibodies anti-CYP3A1/2 were purchased from Chemicon International Inc. (Temecula, CA); all other chemicals and solvents were of the highest commercially available purity.  2.2 Animal treatment and preparation of subcellular fractions Male and female Swiss albino CD1 mice (Harlan-Nossan, Correzzana, Milan), weighing 28–30 g, were housed under controlled conditions (12 h light–dark cycle, 22°C, 60% humidity). They were fed a standard rodent chow and had tap water ad libitum. DT was dissolved in corn oil and administered (i.p.) in a single (3 or 6 mg/kg body wt.) or repeated (3 mg/kg body wt. daily for 3 consecutive days) dose. Controls received the vehicle only, under the same conditions. Mice were fasted 16 h prior to death and killed humanely in accordance with approved Home Office procedures appropriate to the species. Liver, kidney and lung were homogenized in 4 volumes (w/v) of 0.05 M Tris–HCl buffer (pH 7.4) with a Teflon pestle (Potter-Elvehjem) and centrifuged at 9000×g  for 20 min. The post-mitochondrial supernatant obtained, was centrifuged for 60 min at 105 000×g . The pellet was resuspended in 0.1 M K3 P2 O7  (pH 7.4), 1 mM EDTA and 20 nM BHT, and centrifuged again for 60 min at 105 000×g  to obtain the final microsomal fraction. The resultant washed microsomes were then resuspended with a hand-driven homogenizer in 10 mM Tris–HCl buffer (pH 7.4) containing 1 mM EDTA and 20% glycerol (v/v). Subcellular preparations were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, stored at −80°C and used within 1 week [20] .  2.3 Testosterone hydroxylase activity 2.3.1 Incubation and isolation Incubations contained microsomes (equivalent to 1–2 mg protein), 0.6 mM NADP+ , 8 mM glucose 6-phosphate, 1.4 units glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase and 1 mM MgCl2 , in a final volume of 2 ml 0.1 M phosphate Na+ /K+  buffer (pH 7.4). The mixture was preincubated for 5 min at 37°C. The reaction was performed at 37°C by shaking and started by the addition of 80 mM testosterone (dissolved in methanol). After 10 min, the reaction was stopped with the addition of 5 ml ice-cold dichloromethane and 12 nmol corticosterone (internal standard) in methanol. After 1 min vortexing, phases were separated by centrifugation at 2000×g  for 10 min and the aqueous phase was extracted once more with 2 ml dichloromethane. The organic phase was extracted with 2 ml 0.02 N NaOH to remove lipid constituents, dried over anhydrous sodium sulphate and transferred to a small tube. Dichloromethane was evaporated at 37°C under nitrogen and the dried samples stored at −20°C. The samples were dissolved in 100 μl methanol and analyzed by high performance liquid chromatography [21] .  2.3.2 HPLC separation and quantification Chromatographic separations were performed using a system consisting of a high-pressure pump (Waters Model 600E, Multisolvent Delivery System), a sample injection valve (Rheodyne Model 7121, Cotati, CA) with a 20 μl sample loop and an ultraviolet detector (254 nm, Waters Model 486, Tunable Absorbance Detector) connected to an integrator (Millennium 2010, Chromatography Manager). For reverse-phase separation of metabolites, NOVA-PACK C18 analytical column (60 Å, 4 mm, 3.9×150 mm, Waters) was used as the stationary phase. The mobile phase consisted of a mixture of solvent A (7.5% (v/v) tetrahydrofuran in water) and solvent B (7.5% (v/v) tetrahydrofuran and 60% (v/v) methanol in water) at a 1 ml/min flow rate. Metabolite separation was performed by a gradient from 30% to 100% (v/v) of solvent B over 30 min. The eluent was monitored at 254 nm and the area under the absorption band was integrated. The concentration of metabolites was determined by the ratio between respective metabolite peak areas and corticosterone (internal standard) and the calibration curves obtained with synthetic testosterone derivatives [22,23] .   2.4 Protein concentrations Protein was determined according to the method described by Lowry [24]  and Bailey [25] , using bovine serum albumin as standard. Samples were diluted 200 times to provide a suitable protein concentration.  2.5 Statistics and computer analysis Statistical analysis on biochemical data was performed using Wilcoxon's rank method as reported by Box and Hunter [26] . The software packages used were Millennium 1.1 and Windows 3.1 run on a PC 486 IBM-compatible computer.  2.6 Electrophoresis and Western immunoblot Microsomes from both control and DT-treated mice were solubilized in SDS and resolved by PAGE [27,28] . Western blot analysis with rabbit polyclonal antibodies (anti-CYP3A1/2), raised against purified rat hepatic CYP3A [29] , was performed using hepatic and kidney microsomes (0.025 mg of microsomal protein were electrophoresed each time) and visualized with 4-chloro-1-naphthol in a 0.006% hydrogen peroxide solution.   3 Results The expression of testosterone hydroxylase (TH) activities in liver microsomes derived from male and female mice receiving a single 3 or 6 mg/kg body wt. dose of DT is shown in Table 1  . In males DT was able to increase (mainly at the lower dose) the different TH-associated activities, whereas in females an inactivating effect (mainly at the higher dose) was detected. At the lower dose, all TH activities were significantly (P <0.01) increased from ∼2.8-fold (6β-, 16α- and 16β-TH activities) to 16-fold (2β-TH activity) in males. In particular, increases of 6α- (3.7-fold), 7α- and 2α- (∼4.4-fold) and 17-TH (7.1-fold) activities were achieved. At the higher dose, either a 4-fold increase of 2β-TH activity or a 65.2% reduction of 16β-TH activity was observed. In females an inactivating effect was observed mainly at the higher dose tested. A reduction ranging from about 35% (7α- and 17-TH activities, higher dose, and 16β-TH activity, lower dose) to 66.4% (16β-TH activity, higher dose) was recorded in females. A 52% suppression was seen for 6α- and 6β-TH activities at higher dose, whereas a 42% loss of 16α-TH activity (averaged between two doses) was observed. In kidney, DT significantly (P <0.01) induced 6β-TH activity (CYP3A-like) from 2.9- to 4.8-fold, at the higher and lower doses, respectively, and 2α-TH activity (5.0-fold) at the lower dose in male mice (Table 2  ). However, in females 16α-, 2α-and 2β-TH activities were significantly (P <0.01) reduced up to 50.2% (2β-TH activity) at doses of either 3 or 6 mg/kg body wt. Expression of TH activities in lung microsomes is reported in Table 3  . Both 16α- and 2α-TH activities were significantly (P <0.01) increased (7.1- and 29.3-fold, respectively) at the lower dose in males. An increase of 2β-TH activity from 3.1- to 7.0-fold (lower and higher dose, respectively) was achieved in females. Again, a 2-fold increase in 2α- and 16α-hydroxylations was also achieved in females at the 6 mg/kg body wt. dose. In contrast, repeated DT administrations (3 mg/kg body wt., daily for 3 consecutive days) were able to significantly reduce TH activities from ∼39% (6β- and 2α-TH activities) to ∼60% (16β- and 2β-TH activities) in liver microsomes derived from male animals, whereas they had no effect in females (Table 4  ). In kidney, repeated treatment determined a generalized increase of several TH-dependent monooxygenases. For example, enhancements of 7α- (4.8-fold), 2α- and 17-TH (3.1-fold), 6β- (2.9-fold) as well as 2β-TH (2.8-fold) activities were recorded in males (Table 5  ). In females, TH activities were increased from 2.8- (17-TH activity) to 5.2-fold (2α-TH activity). In lung, an increase of 7α-TH activity (7.9- and 9.6-fold, males and females, respectively) was observed (Table 6  ). DT was also able to induce 6β- and 2α-TH activities (∼4.0-fold), 2β-TH (4.6-fold) and 17-TH activities (3.1-fold) in males, whereas 2β-, 16α- and 16β-TH activities were increased up to 2.3-fold and 6β-TH activity up to 1.8-fold in females. The induction of the CYP3A-dependent monooxygenases in liver and kidney microsomes from male mice treated with a single DT dose was sustained by means of Western immunoblotting analysis, using rabbit polyclonal antibodies anti CYP3A1/2 (Fig. 2 ) . The signal shows that the amount of CYP3A apoprotein is enhanced after exposure to the lower DT dose in both liver (lane 2) and kidney (lane 4) with respect to control animals (lanes 3 and 5), due to increased transcription or enzyme stabilization.  4 Discussion In investigating whether dithianon was able to interfere with non-genotoxic mechanisms, changes in murine CYP isoforms in different organs of both sexes were detected using testosterone hydroxylase as a multibiomarker of effects [30] . Testosterone, indeed, is an excellent indicator substrate for analysis of CYP expression, since it undergoes stereo- and regio-selective hydroxylations catalyzed by a wide variety of different CYP isozymes [19] . Literature shows that pesticides are, in general, poor initiating agents and their carcinogenic activity is due mainly to epigenetic mechanisms. In the present investigation we, therefore, considered the potentiality of DT to behave as a toxic/co-toxic co-carcinogen and promoter by means of the ability of this fungicide to affect CYP. It is noteworthy that the aforementioned detrimental phenomena, taken together, can increase the toxicological risk independently of the possible initiating properties of the chemical. DT exhibited a complex pattern of CYP modulation, typical of pesticides that are either substrates, inducers or inhibitors of different CYPs. Both induction and suppression may be isozyme-, organ- and sex-specific, and different CYPs may be affected in different ways by the same chemical under different conditions [31–34] . Results show that DT was able to induce or suppress various CYPs in Swiss albino CD1 mice depending on sex and organ; after a single treatment males were more responsive to induction in all organs (liver, kidney and lung) whereas females were responsive to either suppression (liver and kidney) or induction (lung). In contrast, after repeated injections DT was able to decrease various CYP activities in male liver but to increase them in kidney and lung of both sexes. An interesting result was the selective induction (sustained by immunoblotting analysis) and suppression of the CYP3A isoform, confirming previous data where aminopyrine was used as the preferential CYP3A probe [2] . This is of great importance because CYP3A isoform is the most abundant cytochrome present in human liver. Modulation of the different CYP isozymes could be explained by considering the possible competition of individual CYPs for reductase [35] , the direct inhibiting effects of DT or the direct toxicity derived from CYP induction per se [16,36] . It is possible that the different levels of testosterone metabolites in the various organs reflect the balance between induction and toxicity [20] . The observed different expressions between the various tissues and sexes could imply: (a) different induction mechanisms; (b) alteration in competing pathways involved in the disposition of either parent compound and metabolite; (c) differences in substrate specificity; CYPs coming from different organs can elicit different metabolic responses [20]  due to different substrate specificity. The observed sex differences in enzyme modulation (induction in males, suppression in females) could be explained in terms of quantitative or qualitative differences in the CYPs under control of the sex hormones. DT appears to affect a unique spectrum of isozymes in mice; the complex pattern of induction and suppression of CYP isoforms has potentially significant toxicological consequences, increasing or in some instances reducing the bioactivation of specific xenobiotics, and co-administered drugs, as well as a profound effect on endogenous metabolism and cellular functions [37] . CYP induction can also determine an overproduction of oxygen centred radicals, due to the autooxidation of the CYP-Fe 2+ -O2 −  complex [16,36] , and a pleitropic response, with the increase of either phase I, phase II or other enzymes [10] , correlated to both co-carcinogenic and promoting properties [38,39] . It is significant that a cell transforming activity on BALB/c 3T3 cells induced by DT was found by Perocco et al. [4] . Taken as a whole, the aforementioned toxicological properties of DT indicate that a potential risk could be associated with human exposure.   Acknowledgements This work was supported by the National Research Council of Italy (CNR), by the Ministry of the University and of Scientific and Technological Research (MURST ex 40% and 60%) and by Interuniversitary Biotechnology Center (CIB) Bologna, grants.   
