 The cytochrome P450 (CYP, EC 1.14.14.1) plays an important role in the metabolism of various drugs, steroids, mutagens and carcinogens [1] . It can metabolize chemicals into reactive intermediates binding spontaneously to proteins, nucleic acids, lipids and to CYP itself [2] . Organic compounds can cause CYP destruction by irreversible binding of their metabolites to the CYP heme, apoprotein, or both [3–5] . It was postulated that CYP can be destroyed by superoxide anionradical, H2 O2  or other reactive oxygen species formed during the futile cycle without substrate [6]  or via reactive oxygen species-initiated lipid peroxidation [7] . Some CYP isoforms appear to be more sensitive to certain substrates [8–10] . An inhibition or destruction of CYP may cause prolongation of xenobiotic action, increase or decrease in xenobiotic toxicity, and even affect physiological functions, e.g. steroid biosynthesis [11] . Selective destruction of various CYP isoforms alters the activation/detoxification ratio of procarcinogens and thus may increase the cancer risk in conditions of combined exposure [10,12] . Benzene is an established human and animal carcinogen [13]  acting through an epigenetic mechanism. Benzene-induced myelotoxic and carcinogenic effects are supposed to be caused by covalent binding of its metabolites to biomacromolecules [14,15] . Exposure to benzene was reported to lower the cytochrome P450 content and activity in rats pretreated by phenobarbital in vivo [16] . The role of benzene in CYP destruction was also studied in vitro, and preliminary results revealed that the main destructive agent may be benzoquinone [17] . The aim of this study was to explore in detail the mechanism of CYP destruction by benzene and its metabolites. Lipid peroxidation and formation of reactive oxygen species was followed up as well as the concentration of superoxide anionradical. Selectivity in destruction of inducible and constitutive rat CYP isoforms was studied and a comparison of the sensitivity of human and rat CYP was carried out.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Chemicals All chemicals used were of analytical grade. NADPH, NADP, glucose-6-phosphate, chlorzoxazone, 7-pentoxyresorufin, 7-ethoxyresorufin, resorufin, tolbutamide, nifedipine, β-naphtoflavone, pregnenolone 16α-carbonitrile, MgCl2 , Tris, KCl, and chemicals for electrophoresis and immunoblotting were obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase was obtained from Boehringer (Mannheim, Germany). Solvents used in HPLC methods were products of Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). 6-Hydroxychlorzoxazone was synthetized at Research Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, Czech Republic. Polyclonal anti rat CYP1A1/2, 2B1, 2E1, and 3A1/2 antibodies were generous gifts of Magnus Ingelman-Sundberg (Berzelius Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden). Oxidized nifedipine and hydroxytolbutamide were generous gifts of F. Peter Guengerich (Center in Molecular Toxicology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA). Hydroquinone and catechol was purified by crystallization and benzoquinone by sublimation before use.  2.2 Animals and pretreatments Adult male Wistar rats (200–260 g, VELAZ, Czech Republic) were fed ad libitum on pellet chow and water a week before use. Four groups of rats (n =3–8) were specifically pretreated to induce certain CYP isoforms in rat liver. Control microsomes were prepared from untreated rats. One pretreated group was exposed to benzene by inhalation, 4 mg/l, 20 h/day for 3 days as described before [16]  to induce high levels of CYP2E1. Another group was pretreated with pregnenolone 16α-carbonitrile for CYP3A induction in five i.g. intubations, 25 mg/kg in olive oil in 12-h intervals during 3 days. The third group was pretreated with sodium phenobarbital (0.1% in drinking water for 5 days and one i.p. injection, 80 mg/kg, 24 h before killing) to induce CYP2B1. The β-naphtoflavone-pretreated rats (80 mg/kg in olive oil i.p. for 3 days) were the source of CYP1A1/2-induced microsomes. The animals were killed 24 h after the last inducer dose or immediately after the third exposure to benzene. Livers from animals in particular groups were pooled for preparation of microsomes.  2.3 Human liver samples Human liver samples were obtained from the Transplantation Center IKEM, Czech Republic, from donors who died accidentally as a result of brain injury. Liver samples were obtained at most 30 min after death and were stored in liquid nitrogen until microsomes were isolated. Some of the donors were subjected to therapy including antibiotics (chloramphenicol, penicillin, ampicillin, gentamycin), mannitol, or hormones (hydrocortisone, dexamethasone) for 24–48 h before death.  2.4 Isolation of microsomes Microsomes were prepared according to van der Hoeven and Coon [18]  and stored in aliquots of 0.1 ml at −80°C until use. Protein concentration was determined immediately after preparation of microsomes according to Lowry et al. [19]  using serum albumin as a standard. The total CYP content was estimated by the spectrophotometric method of Omura and Sato [20] .  2.5 Microsomal incubations Microsomes (1 mg protein/ml) were preincubated with 1 mM catechol, hydroquinone, or benzoquinone without NADPH or with NADPH generating system only (10 mM MgCl2 , 10 mM glucose-6-phosphate, 1 mM NADP, 0.5 U/ml glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase) in total volume of 2 ml of 150 mM KCl/50 mM Tris (pH 7.4) buffer. Preincubation proceeded for 60 min at 37°C in a shaking water bath in the dark. After preincubation the content of total CYP was measured by the spectrophotometric method of Omura and Sato [20] . In order to avoid interference of quinones with subsequent analysis after preincubation, microsomes were pelleted by centrifugation for 20 min at 180 000×g  at 4°C. Pellets were resuspended in 0.5 ml KCl–Tris buffer. Determination of activity and apoprotein level of CYP isoforms by assay of metabolism of marker substrates and immunoblotting in sample aliquots followed as well as estimation of concentration of OH radicals, semiquinone radicals and malondialdehyde (MDA).  2.6 Electrophoresis and immunoblotting SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of microsomal proteins was performed according to Laemmli [21]  using a MiniProtean II apparatus (BioRad, Hercules, CA). For immunoblotting 10% polyacrylamide gel was used and 5 μg microsomal protein per lane were applied. Immunoblotting was then done as described by Towbin et al. [22]  using a Miniblotter device (BioRad). Blots were incubated with primary antibody for 1 h at 37°C in PBST buffer (20 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.4)/150 mM NaCl/0.05% Tween 80) Anti-rat CYP1A1/2, 2B1, 2E1, or 3A1/2 polyclonal antibodies were used in dilution of 1/500 for 2E1 antiserum and 1/2000 for the rest of antisera. The next incubation was with goat anti-rabbit IgG coupled to horseradish peroxidase as a secondary antibody (dilution 1/1000 for 1 h at room temperature). For visualization of the bands a mixture of 2.5 mM 1-chloro-4-naphthol and 15 mM H2 O2  in PBS buffer was used.  2.7 Enzyme assays 7-Ethoxyresorufin O -deethylation and 7-pentoxyresorufin O -depentylation were assayed according to Lubet et al. [23]  with 1.75 or 5 μM substrate, respectively, 0.25 mM NADPH, and 100 pmol CYP for 20 min. Coumarin 7-hydroxylation was assayed as described by Yun et al. [24]  with 20 μM substrate, 100 pmol of total CYP for 20 min. Tolbutamide methylhydroxylation was performed according to Knodell et al. [25]  with 2.5 mM substrate, NADPH-generating system (10 mM MgCl2 , 10 mM glucose-6-phosphate, 1 mM NADP, 0.5 U/ml glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase), and 100 pmol CYP for 30 min. Chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation was followed according to Peter et al. [26]  with 0.1 mM substrate, NADPH generating system (see above), and 100 pmol of CYP for 20 min. Oxidation of nifedipine was determined after Guengerich et al. [27]  with 80 μM substrate, NADPH-generating system (see above), and 100 pmol CYP for 15 min. All incubations were carried out in total volume of 0.5 ml of KCl–Tris buffer at 37°C in a shaking water bath.  2.8 Other assays Concentration of OH radicals was measured as described [28]  and lipid peroxidation was estimated according to Buege and Aust [29] . Semiquinone anion radical formation was evaluated as described by Gut et al. [16] .  2.9 Statistics All results are expressed as the average of two measurements, means (±S.D. or subject to correlation analysis. The Student’s t -test was used for analysis of differences between groups.   3 Results and discussion 3.1 CYP destruction by quinones and NADPH: spectrophotometric evaluation of CYP content Microsomes from rats pretreated with various CYP inducers were preincubated with either NADPH without substrate or quinones in the absence of NADPH. This experiment showed that various rat CYP isoforms differed in sensitivity to both NADPH and benzoquinone. CYP 3A isoforms were the most sensitive to destruction by the futile cycle (Fig. 1  A). CYP 3A as well as CYP 1A isoforms were also found to be the most sensitive to the deleterious action of benzoquinone (Fig. 1 B). These results were confirmed by electrophoresis of preincubated microsomes with subsequent immunochemical detection of specific CYP isoforms by immunoblotting (Fig. 2  ). Protein bands corresponding to rat CYP 3A1/2 and 1A1/2 proteins completely disappeared after preincubation of microsomes with benzoquinone while that of CYP 2B1 remained visible. Assays of CYP activity showed that CYP 1A and 3A marker activities were completely destroyed by benzoquinone (100% destruction of nifedipine oxidation and 99.5% destruction of EROD; see Table 1  ). CYP 2B1 and 2E1 proteins seemed to be slightly more resistant to the destructive effect of benzoquinone as judged by comparison of measurement of total CYP content, immunochemical detection, and marker activity assays (96% destruction of PROD and 93% destruction of chlorzoxazone oxidation). Rat constitutive CYP isoforms present in untreated microsomes appeared to be the most resistant to the NADPH-mediated futile cycle and also showed higher resistance to benzoquinone than highly inducible CYP 1A and 3A isoforms (Fig. 1 ). No significant difference between various types of microsomes was observed in sensitivity to hydroquinone (40–60% destruction of total CYP). It seems to be apparent that sensitivities of the relevant CYP isoforms (particularly CYP 1A and 3A isoforms) to quinones differ (Fig. 1 , Fig. 2 , and Table 1 ). On the contrary Belisario et al. observed a significantly higher inhibition of CYP 2B1 than CYP 1A activity by avarol-sesquiterpenoid hydroquinone and its quinone avarone (30 μM) in vitro [30] . A selective inhibition of PROD activity (in comparison with EROD) in rat lung microsomes after inhalation of a benzene derivative m -xylene was reported as well [10] . Data presented here do not suggest higher sensitivity of PROD to quinones in comparison with EROD in rat liver microsomes in vitro. One possible explanation for this discrepancy may be differences in the amounts of quinones presented to microsomal proteins. Differences in the distribution of CYP proteins in the lung and liver may play a role as well.  3.2 Mechanism of CYP destruction: evaluation of the role of OH radicals, semiquinone radical, and lipid peroxidation OH radical formation and induction of lipid peroxidation was measured in various types of microsomes after preincubation with NADPH without substrate, hydroquinone or benzoquinone in the absence of NADPH ( Figs. 3 and 4  ). The NADPH-mediated futile cycle greatly enhanced production of both OH radicals and MDA (marker of lipid peroxidation) in all kinds of microsomes (Fig. 3 B and Fig. 4 B). On the other hand both quinones significantly decreased production of OH radicals and MDA in all kinds of microsomes (Fig. 3 C and Fig. 4 C). Thus it seems that quinones exerted a rather protective effect against OH radical production and lipid peroxidation. Therefore it can be concluded that these processes do not play a significant role in the mechanism of CYP destruction by quinones. Reactive oxygen species-scavenging capacity of quinonic substances was reported [31,32] . The protective effect of quinones against reactive oxygen species formation and induction of lipid peroxidation may play a positive role in the antitumor activity of various cytostatics of a quinone nature or with an expected formation of quinonic metabolites in the course of their metabolic pathways (e.g. adriamycin, daunorubicin, etoposide, etc). The level of OH radicals formation did not correlate with total CYP destruction mediated by NADPH, suggesting that OH radicals do not play a role in the mechanism of CYP destruction by NADPH-mediated futile cycle. Although it was reported that CYP 2E1 is able to produce higher amounts of reactive oxygen species and initiate lipid peroxidation [33] , increased amounts of OH radicals or MDA in microsomes with induced CYP 2E1 were not observed (Fig. 3 ). Nevertheless, the assay conditions used by Ekstroem and Ingelman-Sundberg [33]  markedly differed from those used in this study (different CYP inducers, incubation buffer, temperature and time of incubation, measurement of O2 −  and H2 O2 ). On the other hand the more MDA formed in the presence of NADPH without substrate, the higher was the destruction of total CYP (Fig. 1 A and Fig. 4 B). It was postulated that lipid peroxidation is the main contributing factor in CYP destruction by the NADPH-mediated futile cycle [7]  and data obtained in this study further support this conclusion. Semiquinone radical formation (Fig. 5  ) did not correlate with the rapid course of CYP destruction produced by quinones in microsomes from phenobarbital-pretreated rats observed previously [17] . Taken together these data provide new evidence to support the previously reported conclusion [17]  that CYP destruction proceeds by direct binding of the oxidized form of quinone (in this case benzoquinone) to protein and heme moieties of CYP. These results also comply with the data of Lunte and Kissinger [34]  who found that in microsomal in vitro incubations, hydroquinone was oxidized to benzoquinone, which resulted in an increased rate of covalent binding.  3.3 CYP destruction in human liver microsomes Total CYP destruction was measured in microsomes from five different human liver samples after preincubation with NADPH alone or quinone without NADPH. Microsomes used in this study were screened for activity of various human liver CYP isoforms (1A2, 2A6, 2C9, 2E1, 3A4-Table 2  ). Surprisingly, human liver CYP was significantly more resistant to the destructive effect of the NADPH-mediated futile cycle in comparison with rat CYP. Some of the microsomes even did not show any decrease of the total CYP content after 1-h preincubation with NADPH alone. On the other hand, all samples of human liver microsomes showed significantly higher sensitivity to the deleterious effect of benzoquinone than rat microsomes (Fig. 6  ). The destructive effect of reduced quinones (hydroquinone and catechol) was lower than that of the oxidized form (benzoquinone). A striking interindividual variability (higher than in rats pretreated with various inducers) was observed. Correlation analysis of activity of various CYP isoforms and extent of CYP destruction by quinones revealed that hydroquinone-dependent destruction correlated with EROD activity (r =0.5) and benzoquinone-dependent destruction correlated with nifedipine oxidation (r =0.74). Due to the low number of individuals used in this study the level of significance of these correlations was P >0.2 and thus clearly suggesting a non-significant tendency. Similar experiments on evaluation of CYP destruction in human liver microsomes have not been published and thus there is no possibility to compare these results with data in the literature. In conclusion, the results presented here suggest that humans may be more susceptible to xenobiotics and especially those of quinonic nature. This fact should be taken into consideration where extrapolations from animal studies to humans are done and environmental hazards of human exposure to xenobiotics with expected quinonic metabolites are assessed. Further studies with higher numbers of human liver samples are necessary to assess the sensitivity of specific CYP isoforms to quinone action and thus evaluate the reason for the great interindividual variability observed.    Acknowledgements Author would like to express sincere thanks to F. Peter Guengerich and Magnus Ingelman-Sundberg for their generous gifts. Financial support was provided by grant of Internal Grant Agency of the Czech Ministry of Health, grant No. IGA 3505-3.   
