 Ribonucleotide reductase (EC 1.17.4.1; RR) plays a central role in the de novo  synthesis of deoxyribonucleotides required for DNA replication and repair [1, 2] and there is a strong correlation between the activity of the enzyme and the rate of cellular replication [3, 4] . As such, RR offers a particularly attractive target for neoplastic agents directed against rapidly growing tumors. The mammalian enzyme is composed of two protein dimer subunits, referred to as M1 and M2. The catalytic core of the M2 subunit contains a tyrosyl free radical that is stabilized by a non-heme iron center [5] . Both the iron and the tyrosyl group are essential for catalytic activity. A number of compounds have been identified which destabilize the iron center thereby inactivating the enzyme. Hydroxyurea (HUr) is the only one of these agents that has found clinical utility; however, HUr has a low affinity for the enzyme [6] , a short half-life in man [7] and one of the limitations of HUr therapy is the development of resistance which may occur via several different mechanisms involving both quantitative and qualitative changes in RR (see [8] and [9] for references). Inhibitors of RR which circumvent some of these limitations of HUr could likely contribute to improvements in cancer chemotherapy regimens. The α-(N)-heterocyclic carboxaldehyde thiosemicarbazones (HCTs) represent a class of compounds that are among the most potent known inhibitors of RR activity identified to date [10] . The first observation of anticancer activity of HCTs was made over 40 years ago with the demonstration by Brockman and colleagues that pyridine-2-carboxaldehyde thiosemicarbazone was able to prolong the life span of mice bearing the L1210 leukemia [11] . Since that time many HCT derivatives have been synthesized with modifications in the heterocyclic ring system, the thiosemicarbazone side chain, as well as with variations in ring substituents (see [12–14] for examples and references). Detailed structure activity relationships were established in several murine tumor systems for these early HCTs ([15] and references therein) which ultimately led to clinical trials in humans of 5-hydroxy-2-formyl pyridine thiosemicarbazone (5-HP). These agents strongly complex transition metals such as iron, copper, and zinc and some HCTs have the capacity to remove iron from ferritin, presumably by chelation [16] . It was initially assumed that their ability to chelate iron, which is required for stabilization of the tyrosyl radical in the active site of the M2 subunit of RR, was responsible for the inhibitory activity of the enzyme. Inhibition could occur either by coordination of iron in the metal bound enzyme or by the prior formation of the iron-HCT chelate which then interacts with the enzyme. It appears likely that the iron-thiosemicarbazone complex itself is the inhibitory species [17] . Regardless of the exact mechanism, it is worth noting that there are several HCTs which are greater than 1000-fold more potent than HUr as inhibitors of RR. Of the many members of this class that have been synthesized and shown to be effective inhibitors of RR activity, tumor cell growth in culture, and animal tumors in vivo , only 5-HP has been evaluated clinically [18, 19] . The results of Phase I trials with this agent were not encouraging to a large extent because 5-HP has a short half-life in man, being eliminated primarily as the inactive O -glucuronide conjugate [18] . Other potentially more active drugs designed to be resistant to O -glucuronidation have recently been synthesized and evaluated as antitumor agents [20] . This review focuses on one of the most promising agents to emerge from these efforts, 3-aminopyridine carboxaldehyde thiosemicarbazone (3-AP), which is currently undergoing Phase 1 clinical trials.  2 Materials and methods 2.1.1 Preparation of 3-AP 3-AP was synthesized by the methodology shown in Fig. 1   (adapted from [20] ). Oxidation [21, 22] of 3-nitro-2-picoline (1  ) with selenium dioxide in refluxing dioxane gave 3-nitropyridine-2-carboxaldehyde (2  ). The nitro group was reduced to the amino function by protecting the aldehyde by conversion to the cyclic ethylene acetal (3  ), which was then reduced by catalytic hydrogenation using Pd/C as a catalyst to yield the amino acetal (4  ) [23] . Compound 4   was then reacted with thiosemicarbazide in ethanol containing 10% concentrated hydrochloric acid to form 3-aminopyridine-2-carboxaldehyde thiosemicarbazone hydrochloride. 3-AP (5  ) was then liberated by treatment with aqueous sodium bicarbonate solution.  2.1.2 Animals C3H×DBA2 (CD2 F1 ) mice of 8–10 weeks of age were obtained from the National Cancer Institute. With noted exceptions, mice were treated with a fine suspension of 3-AP in 0.9% NaCl by i.p. bolus injection (0.01 ml/g of mouse body weight).  2.1.3 In vivo  leukemia studies Female CD2 F1  mice were inoculated on day 0 with 1×105  cells of the murine L1210 leukemia. Treatment by i.p. bolus injection was initiated 24 hr later and continued for 6 consecutive days. Post inoculation life span was monitored for 60 days.  2.1.4 Growth of murine L1210 leukemia cells in culture L1210 cells were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2  in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% horse serum. The L1210 cells resistant to HUr, generated and characterized by Carter and Cory [24] , were maintained under the same conditions as the parental cells with the addition of 0.75 mM HUr to the culture medium. The MTS/PMS microtiter assay of Cory et al. [25] was utilized for assessment of inhibition of L1210 cell growth.  2.1.5 Ribonucleotide reductase assay The non-heme iron and effector binding subunits of RR were prepared from Ehrlich ascites tumor cells as described previously [26, 27] . CDP reductase activity was assayed by the method of Steeper and Steuart [28] . The assay mixture contained 3.75 nmol [14 C]CDP (0.03 μCi), 900 nmol dithiothreitol, 150 nmol ATP, and aliquots of the non-heme iron and effector binding subunit fractions of RR in a final vol of 0.02 ml. After a 30 min incubation at 37°C, the CDP reductase reactions were stopped in a boiling water bath. The nucleotides were converted to nucleosides by snake venom treatment [28] and deoxycytidine was separated from cytidine on a Dowex 1-borate ion-exchange column.  2.1.6 [3 H]Thymidine and [3 H]uridine incorporation The effects of 3-AP on RNA and DNA syntheses were determined by measuring the incorporation of radiolabeled uridine and thymidine into the nucleic acids of L1210 cells incubated with various concentrations of the drug. Cells were incubated with either 0.1 μM [3 H]thymidine (0.5 μCi/ml) or 0.01 μM [3 H]uridine (0.5 μM/ml) for 30 min at 37°C, then washed with ice-cold PBS. The nucleic acids were precipitated with ice-cold 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and collected on Whatman GF/C filters. The filters were then washed 3 times with 5 ml of ice-cold 10% TCA followed by 2 washes with 95% ethanol, dried and incubated with 0.25 ml of 4 N HCl at 65°C for 1 hr. The samples were then neutralized by addition of 0.4 ml of 2.5 N NaOH. After addition of 5 ml of scintillation fluid, the radioactivity in each sample was quantified by scintillation spectrometry.    3 Results and discussion Growth inhibitory activity of 3-AP for wildtype and HUr-resistant L1210 leukemia cells in vitro . The effectiveness of 3-AP as an inhibitor of the growth of wildtype and HUr-resistant L1210 cells has been determined, and the results are summarized in Table 1  . L1210 cells selected for resistance to HUr did not exhibit a corresponding decrease in sensitivity to 3-AP. 3-AP also exhibited 65-fold greater potency than HUr against the parental cells. These properties of 3-AP may impact favorably on the clinical outcome of cancer patients requiring inclusion of a RR inhibitor in their treatment regimen if 3-AP is substituted for HUr, considering the likely emergence of HUr-resistant cancer cells and the suboptimal pharmacologic profile of HUr that limit its effectiveness as an antineoplastic agent. 3.1.1 In vivo  antileukemic activity of 3-AP When 3-AP was administered twice daily for six consecutive days to mice inoculated i.p. with the L1210 leukemia, significant increases in life span were observed with each dosage employed and long term (60 day) survivors were produced at drug dosage levels that were well tolerated by the hosts (Table 2  ). Detailed studies to optimize the treatment regimen/schedule in this tumor model have not been undertaken. The fact that 3-AP as a single agent was active against the L1210 leukemia over a broad range of dosages and was curative for some mice suggests that this agent may well have a wide range of therapeutic utility in the clinical setting.  3.1.2 Inhibition of RR activity by 3-AP The reduction of CDP to dCDP by purified RR from Ehrlich ascites cells was effectively inhibited by 3-AP with an IC50  of 0.3 μM. Thus, 3-AP is 1000-fold more potent as an inhibitor of mammalian RR than has been reported for HUr [29] and ranks among the most potent HCTs, with an IC50  value 6-fold lower than that of 5-HP.  3.1.3 Effects of 3-AP on nucleic acid synthesis 3-AP selectively inhibited the incorporation of radiolabeled thymidine into the acid-insoluble fraction of L1210 cells compared to the incorporation of radiolabeled uridine (Fig. 2  ). These results indicate that inhibition of DNA synthesis is the primary action of 3-AP on nucleic acid synthesis.  3.1.4 Role of iron in the inhibitory activity of 3-AP Although interaction with the iron stabilized tyrosyl radical is involved in the action of HUr and most probably in the action of 3-AP on RR, the exact mechanisms are not identical. This is evidenced by the failure of the iron chelator Desferal to augment 3-AP induced inhibition of RR (Table 3  ), whereas addition of Desferal to Adenocarcinoma 755 cell cultures increased the inhibition of DNA synthesis and growth produced by HUr [30] . In fact, the inhibition of RR by 3-AP was almost completely abolished by Desferal (Table 3 ). Moreover, the preformed metal chelates of 3-AP produced by addition of exogenous iron, copper, or zinc were more potent as inhibitors of CDP reductase than 3-AP itself and, with the exception of the 3-AP-Cu (II) chelate, were more effective than 3-AP as inhibitors of the growth of L1210 cells in culture (Table 4  ). The Fe (II) and Fe (III) complexes of 3-AP were superior to the Cu (II) and Zn (II) chelates in both systems. These findings provide support for the concept that the relevant inhibitory species is the iron-HCT complex rather than the free HCT. Like HUr, the effects of the HCTs on cellular proliferation are more pronounced on cells in the S-phase of the cell cycle. Thus, the most sensitive cancers to the cytotoxic action of 3-AP when used alone most likely are those with high growth fractions, such as the acute leukemias or chronic leukemias in blast crisis. To expand the applicability of 3-AP to cancers with a low growth fraction, such as occurs with most solid tumors, it may be necessary to use combinations of chemotherapeutic agents, taking advantage of the ability of 3-AP to synergize with drugs that damage the DNA (presumably due to the capacity of 3-AP to inhibit the repair of lesions in DNA). Preliminary data from our laboratory indicate that 3-AP has the capacity to synergize with 1-acetyl-1,2-bis(methylsulfonyl)-2-(2-chloroethyl)hydrazine [32] , cis-platin, and etoposide against the L1210 leukemia in mice. These findings suggest that in addition to the activity of 3-AP as a single agent, prevention of the repair of DNA lesions by 3-AP will result in efficacious drug combinations for the treatment of cancer. Additional information on the timing of the repair of DNA of cancer cells following damage by an agent acting at the level of preformed DNA may be useful in optimizing the schedule of administration of the RR inhibitor relative to the treatment with a DNA damaging agent. The centrality of RR in cellular proliferation emphasizes the importance of developing more effective inhibitors in order to exploit any/all possible needs of the cancer cell. HCTs, such as 3-AP, with insensitivity to O -glucuronidation, a major factor in the inactivity as an anticancer agent in humans of 5-HP, may prove to have therapeutic efficacy. In preclinical and biochemical studies, 3-AP appears to be superior to any of the other HCTs reported to date and, therefore, its consideration as a candidate for clinical trials in the treatment of cancer is warranted and it is currently undergoing a Phase I trial.    4 Summary The enzyme RR catalyzes the conversion of ribonucleoside diphosphates to their deoxyribonucleotide counterparts. RR is critical for the generation of the cytosine, adenine, and guanine deoxyribonucleotide 5′-triphosphate building blocks of DNA, which are present in cells as exceedingly small intracellular pools. Therefore, interference with the function of RR might well result in an agent with significant antineoplastic activity, particularly against rapidly proliferating tumor cells. HUr is the only inhibitor of RR in clinical usage; this agent, however, is a relatively poor inhibitor of the enzyme and has a short serum half-life. Consequently, HUr is a relatively weak anticancer agent. In an effort to develop a more potent inhibitor of RR with utility as an anticancer agent, we have synthesized 3-AP and demonstrated (a) potent inhibition of L1210 leukemia cells in vitro , (b) curative capacity for mice bearing the L1210 leukemia, (c) marked inhibition of RR, and (d) sensitivity of HUr-resistant cells to 3-AP. These findings collectively demonstrate the clinical potential of 3-AP as an antineoplastic agent.   Acknowledgements This research was supported by U.S. Public Health Service Grants CA-53340 (ACS) and CA-55540 (JGC) from the National Cancer Institute. RAF is a Special Fellow of the Leukemia Society of America.   
