 It has become increasingly evident from epidemiologic as well as laboratory studies that a vast variety of dietary or medicinal phytochemicals have substantial chemopreventive properties [1–3] . Curcumin, a yellow colouring ingredient present in turmeric (Curcuma longa  Linn, Zingiberaceae), has been shown to exert anti-carcinogenic or anti-mutagenic effects in diverse animal models and also in cultured cells [4–10] . One of the biochemical mechanisms of cancer chemopreventive activities of curcumin has been attributed to its inhibition of tumor promotion (reviewed in Ref. [6] and references therein). Alpinia oxyphylla  Miquel that also belongs to the ginger family (Zingiberaceae) has been used in Oriental herbal medicine. Yakuchinone A (1-[4′-hydroxy-3′-methoxyphenyl]-7-phenyl-3-heptanone) and yakuchinone B (1-[4′-hydroxy-3′-methoxyphenyl]-7-phenylhept-1-en-3-one) which are present in A. oxyphylla  have been reported to be strong inhibitors of prostaglandin biosynthesis in vitro. Like curcumin, these substances have a diarylheptanoid moiety with a carbonyl functional group (see structures in Fig. 1  ) and are hence anticipated to exhibit the cancer chemopreventive activity. Since tumor promotion is closely linked to inflammation and oxidative stress [11, 12] , it is likely that compounds with strong anti-oxidative and anti-inflammatory activities can act as anti-tumor promoters. In the present work, we have evaluated an anti-tumor promoting potential of aforementioned diarylheptanoids derived from A. oxyphylla  in terms of their capability to suppress papilloma formation and epidermal ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) activity induced by the tumor promoter, 12-O -tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) in mouse skin. Their effects on TPA-stimulated superoxide generation and tumor necrosis factor-α production in human promyelocytic leukemia (HL-60) cells and on DNA binding of the transcription factor, activator protein-1 (AP-1) in NIH3T3 cells were also examined.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Materials TPA was a product of Alex Biochemicals (San Diego, CA, USA). Thiobarbituric acid (TBA), cytochrome c , sodium ascorbate and l -ornithine were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). dl -[1−14 C  ]Ornithine was a product of Dupont/NEN Research Products (Boston, MA, USA). RPMI 1640 and fetal bovine serum were obtained from Gibco BRL (Grand Island, NY, USA). Other chemicals and solvents used were of highest analytical grade. Human promyelocytic leukemia (HL-60) and NIH3T3 cells were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD, USA).  2.2 ODC assay The ODC activity in epidermal soluble fraction was assessed by measuring the release of 14 CO 2   from dl -[1−14 C  ]ornithine (40–60 mCi/mmol) as reported previously [13] . The protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method [14] using bovine serum albumin as a standard.  2.3 ELISA assay for TNF-α production in HL-60 cells The exponentially growing HL-60 cells (2.5×105  cells/ml) maintained in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum were exposed to either yakuchinone A or yakuchinone B in the presence of 3 nM TPA at 37°C for 16 h. The cells were collected by centrifugation (2000 rpm for 10 min) and the amount of TNF-α in supernatant was measured by use of a human TNF-α ELISA kit from Amersham Life Science (Buckinghamshire, UK) according to the manufacturer's instruction.  2.4 Measurement of superoxide generation in differentiated HL-60 cells HL-60 cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum and 5 μg/ml gentamicin as described previously [15] . The cells were suspended at a density of 5×105  cells/ml in RPMI medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum and 1.3% DMSO and incubated for 6 days at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 . Cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed with and resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline (1×106  cells/ml). Cells were preincubated for 10 min with and without a test compound, and TPA (8 μM) and cytochrome c  (60 μM) were added to the reaction mixture. After 30 min incubation at 37°C, absorbance at 550 nm was read.  2.5 Lipid peroxidation in rat brain homogenates Brain homogenates from young adult male Sprague–Dawley rats were prepared in 0.15 M KCl (10%, w/v) and centrifuged at 800×g  for 10 min, and the supernatant was used for in vitro lipid peroxidation assays. The incubation mixture in a final volume of 1 ml contained brain homogenate (0.5 ml), 0.15 M KCl, and varying amounts of test compounds. Lipid peroxidation was initiated by addition of ferric chloride (100 μM) alone or in combination with ascorbic acid (100 μM). After incubation for 20 min at 37°C, the reaction was terminated by addition of 0.5 ml cold trichloroacetic acid (5.5%) and the equal volume of TBA (2% in 0.05 M NaOH) followed by heating at 100°C for 10 min. The mixtures were then centrifuged at 1000×g  for 10 min and the absorbance of the supernatant was measured at 532 nm.  2.6 Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) for determining AP-1 activation NIH 3T3 cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum and penicillin (100 unit/l) and streptomycin (100 μg/l) in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 –95% air. Nuclear proteins were isolated according to the method of Dignam et al. [16] . In brief, cells were lysed with ice-cold buffer A (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.9; 10 mM KCl; 0.1 mM EDTA; 1 mM dithiothreitol; 0.6% NP-40) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Boeringer Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany) and centrifuged. The supernatant was removed and the pellets were resuspended in buffer C (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.9; 0.4 M NaCl; 1 mM EDTA; 1 mM dithiothreitol) containing protease inhibitor cocktail and incubated on ice for 1 h. After centrifugation, the supernatant was harvested and used as nuclear extracts. The protein concentrations of nuclear extracts were measured by the Bradford method [14] . The AP-1 oligonucleotide probe was prepared by labeling a double-strand oligonucleotide (5′-CGC TTG ATG ACT CA   G CCG GAA-3′, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) containing AP-1 binding sites (underlined) with [α−32 P  ]CTP and Klenow enzyme. Five micrograms of nuclear proteins were incubated with equal amounts of the probe in the presence of 1 μg of poly(dI–dC) (Pharmacia, Piscataway, NJ, USA) at room temperature for 15 min and the mixtures were loaded onto a 6% polyacrylamide gel at 80 V in 0.5× TBE buffer. The gel was dried, autoradiographed and exposed to an X-ray film at −75°C.   3 Results and discussion Results of our previous study revealed that topical application of the methanol extract of A. oxyphylla  to the dorsal epidermis of mice during the process of tumor promotion markedly suppressed the papilloma formation [15] . The extract also attenuated the mouse ear edema induced by the tumor promoter, TPA [15] . In the present study, we have found that yakuchinone A and yakuchinone B, major pungent ingredients derived from A. oxyphylla , have the anti-tumor promoting potential as determined by their inhibition of phorbol ester-induced ODC activity. ODC is a rate-limiting enzyme in the synthesis of polyamines that play pivotal roles in cell growth and proliferation. ODC is rapidly induced by many mitogenic stimuli including TPA and has been regarded as a biochemical hallmark of tumor promotion [17–20] . Conversely, various anti-tumor promoting agents exhibit inhibitory effects on the catalytic activity of this enzyme and its mRNA expression [21–29] . When applied topically onto shaven backs of mice 30 min prior to TPA at a dose of 50 μmol, yakuchinone A and yakuchinone B inhibited the epidermal ODC activity by 52% and 81%, respectively (Fig. 2  ) 5 h after the treatment, which was in good agreement with their inhibition of skin tumor promotion (K.-S. Chun et al., manuscript in preparation). Inflammation is closely associated with the tumor promotion process and the production of such cytokines as IL-1α and TNF-α that mediate inflammatory processes has been shown to be stimulated by phorbol ester [30–32] . Recent studies have revealed that topical application of TPA to mouse skin induces elevated expression of TNF-α in the epidermis [33–35] , suggesting that this pleiotropic cytokine directly or indirectly mediates the inflammatory and hyperplastic responses elicited by the tumor promoter. Furthermore, TNF-α markedly stimulated transformation of BALB/3T3 cells induced by 3-methylcholanthrene [36] and is hence considered as an endogenous tumor promoter. Epigallocatechin gallate, a chemopreventive polyphenol present in green tea, has been shown to suppress TNF-α mRNA expression in BALB/3T3 cells treated with the tumor promoter okadaic acid [31] . When HL-60 cells were treated with TPA (3 nM), the production of TNF-α increased steadily up to 16 h after the treatment (Fig. 3  ). Treatment of either yakuchinone A or yakuchinone B at 50 or 100 μM significantly suppressed the TPA-stimulated production of TNF-α in HL-60 cells at 12 h (Fig. 4  ). Likewise, TPA-induced expression of TNF-α mRNA in HL-60 cells or mouse skin was also attenuated by these diarylheptanoids (K.-S. Chun and Y.-J. Surh, unpublished data). There has been increasing evidence that oxidative stress caused by reactive oxygen species (ROS) can contribute to multi-stage carcinogenesis [37–41] , particularly in the promotion stage and a variety of anti-oxidants have been shown to be effective anti-tumor promoters [42–44] . Curcumin, for instance, has been reported to alleviate the TPA-induced oxidative DNA damage in mouse epidermis [45] and also cultured mouse fibroblast cells [46] . The compound also suppressed superoxide production in macrophages activated by TPA [47] . Likewise, yakuchinone A and yakuchinone B attenuated the TPA-stimulated generation of superoxide anion in differentiated HL-60 cells (Fig. 5  ). In another experiment, both compounds suppressed lipid peroxidation in rat brain homogenates (Table 1  ). AP-1 is a well-defined transcription factor that is known to be regulated by the intracellular redox state and is hence implicated in the inducible expression of a wide variety of genes involved in oxidative stress and cellular response mechanisms [48, 49] . Functional activation of AP-1 is believed to play a pivotal role in signal transduction mediating TPA-induced tumor promotion. Enhanced binding of AP-1 to the TPA response element (TRE) in TPA-stimulated cells has been associated with the increased transcription of different responsive genes. According to a recent study by Huang et al. [50] , curcumin suppresses TPA-induced TRE-binding activity of c-Jun/AP-1, which may account for the anti-tumor promoting effect of this chemopreventive agent. More recently, curcumin has been reported to inhibit TNF-α-induced binding of AP-1 to DNA in bovine aortic endothelial cells [51] . When treated to mouse fibroblast cells in culture at a concentration of 100 μM for 1 h, both yakuchinone A and yakuchinone B mitigated the TPA-induced binding of AP-1 to TRE (Fig. 6  ). Mitogen-induced AP-1 activation has been shown to be inhibited by anti-oxidants, suggesting the involvement of ROS in this process. Based on these findings, it seems likely that the suppression of AP-1 activation by yakuchinones is attributable, in part, to their anti-oxidant activity. In early studies, yakuchinone A and yakuchinone B were found to be potent anti-inflammatory agents as determined by their strong inhibition of prostaglandin biosynthesis by bovine seminal vesicle cyclooxygenase [52] and a rabbit renal medulla microsomal fraction [53, 54] . In recent years, there is an expanding body of data supporting that suppression of prostaglandin synthesis through selective inhibition of cyclooxygenase, particularly cyclooxygenase-2 which is inducible by various extracellular stimuli, is regarded as an important strategy for cancer chemoprevention [55] . Inhibitors of arachidonic acid metabolism have been found to induce programmed death or apoptosis in certain types of tumor cells [56–59] . Thus, some nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, including sulindac and aspirin, exhibit growth-inhibitory and anti-proliferative properties in tumor cells via induction of apoptosis [60–62] . In line with the findings on the capability of inhibitors of arachidonic acid metabolism to induce apoptosis or suppress proliferation of selected malignant or transformed cells, treatment of human colon cancer (HCA-7) cells with prostaglandin E2  inhibited apoptosis via induction of death suppressing protein Bcl-2 [63] . We have recently reported that both yakuchinone A and yakuchinone B induce apoptotic death in HL-60 cells, which accounts for their anti-proliferative activity [64] . Although it remains unclear whether these diarylheptanoids induce apoptosis selectively in cancer cells, they appear to be relatively less cytotoxic in normal cells. In this context, it is of interest to note that curcumin induces apoptosis in various types of cell lines [9, 65, 66] derived from human tumors, but the compound was inactive for the normal cells in primary culture [66] . In conclusion, this study demonstrates that yakuchinone A and yakuchinone B derived from A. oxyphylla  Miquel, inhibit promotion of skin tumorigenesis and tumor promoter-induced epidermal ODC activity in mice. These diarylheptanoids also suppressed TPA-stimulated production of TNF-α and superoxide in cultured HL-60 cells. Furthermore, TPA-induced c-Jun/AP-1 activation was also attenuated by the above substances. Additional studies are in progress to elucidate the detailed molecular mechanisms underlying anti-tumor promoting effects of yakuchinone A and yakuchinone B.   Acknowledgements This work was supported by the G-7 project (1541-211) sponsored by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea and a grant from Korea Ministry of Health and Welfare (Grant No., HMP-96-D-2-1034).   
