 The majority of adult cancers are carcinomas of epithelial origin with lung, colon, and uterus as the primary sites, which reflects a selective vulnerability of these tissues to carcinogenic insult as a result of frequent exposure to external environment. Indeed, it is estimated that up to 80 to 90% of all cancers are attributable to environmental risk factors, including chemicals, radiations, and viruses. The notion that a majority of human cancers have an environmental origin implies an optimistic outlook in terms of cancer prevention since most cancer-causing substances are introduced into the environment by human activities and are hence, controllable or removable. The elimination of environmental carcinogens or at least avoiding exposure to them offers the opportunity to prevent most cancers, which is a basis of primary prevention. Recent advances in our understanding at the cellular and molecular levels of carcinogenesis have led to the development of a new promising strategy for cancer prevention, that is, chemoprevention [1–3] . Chemoprevention is defined as the use of specific chemical substances (natural or synthetic) or their mixtures to suppress, retard, or reverse the process of carcinogenesis. It is one of the novel approaches of controlling cancer alternative to therapy that has some limitations and drawbacks in the treatment of patients. The term chemoprevention was initially coined by Michael Sporn who utilized retinoids to halt experimental carcinogenesis [4] . Since we are all exposed in greater or lesser degree to environmental carcinogens from diverse sources, it is important to find a way to neutralize these carcinogens or protect against deleterious effects they exert. In this respect, chemoprevention offers a realistic promise of reducing the incidence of human cancer. The primary goal of chemoprevention research is to identify effective agents and/or develop efficient strategies for clinical trials and ultimately, application to human populations. In order to better practice the chemoprevention, one must precisely understand the nature and mechanisms of carcinogenesis.  2 Molecular basis of chemoprevention Carcinogenesis is characterized by a complex process that involves a series of individual steps. From the stand point of the experimental carcinogenesis in rodents, tumor development has been generally considered to consist of three distinct steps—initiation, promotion, and progression as depicted in Fig. 1  . Initiation is an irreversible event that begins when the cells in normal tissues are exposed to a carcinogen and their genomic DNA undergoes damage that remains unrepaired or misrepaired. In case of chemically-induced carcinogenesis, initiation involves uptake of a given carcinogenic agent with subsequent distribution and transport to organs and tissues where metabolism occurs, the interaction of a reactive metabolite with cellular DNA with subsequent structural alterations in the DNA molecule, and final fixation of the genotoxic damage to cause mutation. The resulting somatic mutation in a damaged cell can be reproduced during mitosis, which gives rise to a clone of mutated cells. Promotion is expansion of the damaged cells to form an actively proliferating multi-cellular premalignant tumor cell population. Progression is the irreversible process which produces a new clone of tumor cells with increased proliferative capacity, invasiveness, and metastatic potential. Conventional classification of chemopreventive agents, first proposed by Wattenberg [5] , is based on the underlying mechanisms by which they exert protective effects in a specific stage of multi-step carcinogenesis. According to this system, chemopreventers are subdivided into two major categories, i.e., blocking agents and suppressing agents (Fig. 2  ). Blocking agents are typically those compounds that can inhibit initiation either by inhibiting the formation of carcinogens from precursor molecules or reactive metabolites from the parent carcinogens, or by preventing the ultimate electrophilic and carcinogenic species from interacting with critical cellular target molecules, such as DNA, RNA, and proteins. Suppressing agents are considered to inhibit malignant expression of initiated cells, in either the promotion or the progression stage. Certain chemopreventive agents (e.g., curcumin and resveratrol) have more than one defined mechanism of action, and hence, possess both blocking and suppressive properties [6] . A vast variety of chemical compounds have been identified to elicit pronounced chemopreventive effects and many of them are of plant origin that are present naturally in our daily foods or have been used for traditional herbal medication [7–9] . Some spices or herbs contain bioactive phenolic substances with potent antimutagenic and anticarcinogenic properties.  3 Some novel strategies applicable for identifying chemopreventive phytochemicals Numerous phenolic substances present in fruits and vegetables or in medicinal plants have been found to retain potential cancer chemopreventive activities. For most of known chemopreventive phytochemicals, however, their protective effects are based solely on the results from animal tests. Unfortunately, however, the predictive capability of the majority of animal model studies in the evaluation of cancer chemopreventive agents for use in humans is uncertain and often limited. The efficacy, as well as the safety of selected phytochemicals with promising chemopreventive potential should be validated through properly-designed and well-controlled clinical intervention trials. The use of a reliable biomarker as an early surrogate endpoint is pivotal in conducting prospective chemopreventive trials. There have been extensive studies conducted during the past two decades to search for potential naturally occurring cancer chemopreventive agents and some of them hold promise for human use. Antioxidant vitamins or their synthetic derivatives have been frequently investigated for their possible chemopreventive efficacy among normal or high risk (e.g., smokers, asbestos workers, etc.) populations. While there has been substantial body of evidence from both experimental and epidemiologic studies supporting the beneficial effects of fruits and vegetables, which are good sources of antioxidant vitamins, the chemopreventive effects of dietary supplementation of individual vitamins or their mixtures remain controversial at the present time. We have lessons from the large-scale randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene (ATBC) Cancer Prevention Study that was conducted with about 30,000 Finnish male smokers under the joint sponsorship of the US National Cancer Institute and the National Public Health Institute in Finland. In this particular trial, a daily intake of 20 mg of beta-carotene was not protective against lung cancer. On the contrary, the cumulative incidence and the mortality of lung cancer increased, compared with those observed among people in the placebo control group [10] . The results of this study were contradictory to the beneficial effects of beta-carotene demonstrated in the previous intervention trials, as well as laboratory studies. Nonetheless, the unexpected negative finding in the ATBC study is not surprising and may not be fortuitous. Since the subjects who participated in this study were relatively old (50 to 69 years of age) with a smoking habit, it seems likely that the majority of them already had mutated genes (e.g., p53  tumor-suppressor or ras -oncogenes) or premalignant lesions before starting beta-carotene supplementation, as a result of cigarette smoking. If it is the case, one may not expect the beneficial effects of beta-carotene that is most active in early stages of carcinogenesis. Excess amount of beta-carotene might have met the substantial growth requirement of rapidly proliferating cancerous cells, thereby stimulating their growth rather than suppressing it. In support of this assumption, post-initiation application of this compound stimulated the mammary carcinogenesis in rodents [11] . Similarly, dietary supplementation of beta-carotene enhanced the development of papillomas in mice [12] , probably via stimulation of the promotion of carcinogenesis. Besides antioxidative vitamins, fruits and vegetables contain countless phytochemicals of less nutritional value but with substantial chemopreventive potential. However, few population-based chemoprevention trials with non-vitamin phytochemicals have been conducted. Rational and successful implementation of chemopreventive strategies rely on the precise understanding of underlying molecular mechanisms. Alterations of carcinogen metabolism and subsequent DNA adduction may represent an important mechanism by which a given phytochemical modulates chemically-induced carcinogenesis in the initiation stage. Modulation of carcinogen metabolism is often considered by many investigators as a mechanistic basis for protective effects of many types of chemopreventive phytochemicals. However, carcinogen-metabolizing enzymes in general have dual roles and preventive modulation of metabolism, i.e., suppression of activation or acceleration of detoxification of one carcinogen, may alter the fate of other xenobiotics and endogenous compounds [13–15] , which may limit its utilization as a criterion in identifying or defining new chemopreventive agents. Furthermore, inhibition of initiation is unlikely to be a practical approach to chemoprevention, since there are diverse types of initiators present in our environment and it is not feasible to find a chemopreventive agent that can nullify the initiating activities of all the carcinogens to which we are exposed. Therefore, recent chemopreventive strategies are more concerned with identifying substances with antiproliferative or antiprogressive activities that can suppress the transformation of initiated or precancerous cells to malignant ones, rather than search for anti-initiators. Chemopreventive agents that fall into this category include modulators of signal transduction, inhibitors of oncogene activation, inhibitors of polyamine metabolism, enhancers of gap junctional intercellular communication, inhibitors of angiogenesis, etc. [16] . Recently, considerable attention has been focused on dietary and/or pharmacological manipulation of apoptosis as a novel and promising strategy for cancer chemoprevention, as well as therapy [17–19] . The maintenance of homeostasis in normal mammalian tissues reflects a critical balance between cell proliferation and cell death via apoptosis. In contrast, apoptosis may be inhibited or perturbed in tumors in which the rate of cell proliferation exceeds that of cell loss. If misregulation of apoptosis results in a failure of tissue size regulation, which eventually leads to the malignant transformation, apoptotic cell death could be induced to augment interventions designed to suppress or reverse the development of cancer. Indeed, various chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic agents are now known to exert their antiproliferative or cytostatic effects by inducing apoptosis in (pre)malignant cells [17–23] . Selected chemopreventive vitamins or phytochemicals have the propensity to suppress or retard the growth of cancer cells in this way [[17, 24, 25] , and more examples in this review]. Suppression of prostaglandin synthesis through selective inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is another promising strategy applicable to identification and development of chemopreventive drugs. Prostaglandins are known to play crucial roles in pathogenesis of malignancy, particularly in colon carcinogenesis and certain nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as aspirin, piroxicam, and sulindac, have protective effects on experimental carcinogenesis [26, 27] . Furthermore, epidemiologic data indicate a reduced risk of colorectal cancer among individuals who intake aspirin or other NSAIDs on a regular basis [28] . Moreover, in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis, the NSAID sulindac caused marked regression of polyps and prevented their recurrence [29] . Selected NSAIDs have been reported to suppress growth and proliferation of cancer cells by inducing apoptosis [30–32] . Some phenolic substances derived from Zingiberaceae (ginger family) plants have potent anti-inflammatory activity and induce apoptosis in human cancer cell lines [[33–36] ; vide infra].  4 Selected chemopreventive dietary and/or medicinal phenolic substances 4.1 Capsaicin Capsaicin (trans -8-methyl-N -vanillyl-6-nonenamide; structure shown in Fig. 3  ) is a principal pungent ingredient present in hot red and chili peppers that belong to the plant genus Capsicum  (Solanaceae). The compound has been tested by many investigators for its effects on experimental carcinogenesis and mutagenesis [for review, see Refs. [37, 38] and references therein]. Data in the literature indicate that capsaicin has a dual role in carcinogenic and mutagenic processes and its effects in some degree relies on the doses, routes of administration, and types of tissues affected. Although the previous studies were mainly focused on evaluation of carcinogenic or co-carcinogenic potential of capsaicin in hot peppers in consideration of its irritancy, the compound has recently been reported to retain protective properties against experimental carcinogenesis and mutagenesis [37, 38] . In several instances, it has been demonstrated that capsaicin modulates microsomal cytochrome P 450-dependent monooxygenase activities, thereby affecting metabolism of carcinogens and other xenobiotics [39–45] . Capsaicin was found to interact with rat hepatic mixed-function oxidases as revealed by prolongation of pentobarbital or hexobarbital sleeping time [39–41] and inhibition of ethylmorphine demethylase activity, as well as production of a type I spectral change [39] . The compound also suppresses the activity of rat epidermal aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase [42] that is responsible for the biotransformation of benzo[a]pyrene and other polyaromatic hydrocarbons. Metabolism and subsequent covalent DNA binding of benzo[a]pyrene in human and murine keratinocytes were attenuated by capsaicin [42] . Taken together, the above findings suggest that capsaicin can influence the initiating activities of certain chemical carcinogens through modulation of their metabolic activation and/or detoxification. Benzo[a]pyrene-induced pulmonary tumor in mice was inhibited by capsaicin treatment [43] . Capsaicin displayed inhibitory effects on metabolism, mutagenicity and/or covalent DNA binding of aflatoxin B1 [44] and the tobacco-specific nitrosamine, 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) [45–47] . Capsaicin and its saturated analog dihydrocapsaicin (Fig. 3  for chemical structures) have been shown to inhibit cytochrome P 450 2E1 [48, 49] , an isoform that catalyzes metabolic activation, as well as detoxification of many low molecular weight carcinogens. In agreement with these findings, both compounds inhibited the mutagenicity and/or tumorigenicity of vinyl carbamate and dimethylnitrosamine [49] , which are preferentially activated by cytochrome P 450 2E1. In another study, capsaicin ameliorated the peroxidative changes in rat hepatic and pulmonary tissues induced by chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, or dichloromethane [50] . Cytochrome P 450 2E1 again plays a role in activation of these halogenated hydrocarbons. Capsaicin pretreatment also protects against the free radical-induced pulmonary damage in rats exposed to such gaseous chemical irritants as sulfur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide [51] . It has been reported that intraperitoneal administration of capsaicin attenuates cyclophosphamide-induced chromosomal aberrations and DNA breaks in mice [52] . Although topical application of capsaicin can initially induce ear edema in mice [53] , subsequent reapplications of the compound suppressed the inflammatory response [54] . Carrageenan-induced inflammation in rats was also ameliorated by capsaicin treatment [55] . Furthermore, capsaicin was found to inhibit platelet aggregation [56–58] . Another study, however, has demonstrated the stimulation of prostaglandin biosynthesis by capsaicin [59] . The observed antiplatelet or anti-inflammatory effects of capsaicin appears to be associated with its interference with phospholipase A2 [60] , a key enzyme mediating the inflammatory process. Since tumor promotion is related to inflammation which can stimulate the proliferation of initiated cells, it would be of interest to determine if capsaicin could act as an anti-tumor promoting agent. Capsaicin was found to antagonize the mouse ear edema induced by croton oil [61] , lending further support to the above idea. Our preliminary study indicates that topical application of capsaicin along with phorbol ester onto shaven backs of ICR mice, after initiation with 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene, transiently increased the skin tumor formation, but the overall papillomagenesis did not increase [62] . Apparently, some of the tumors became slightly regressed after 12 weeks of post-initiation. Epithelial thickening and appearance of atypical cells caused by combination of 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene and phorbol ester were also reduced by capsaicin treatment. According to a recent study by Morre et al. [63] , capsaicin preferentially repressed the growth of some transformed cells of human origin, including HeLa, ovarian carcinoma, mammary adenocarcinoma, and promyelocytic leukemia (HL-60) cells in culture. The inhibition of cell survival was associated with induction of apoptosis as revealed by characteristic morphological changes and appearance of fragmented nuclear DNA [63] . The capsaicin-induced growth inhibition and apoptosis in the aforementioned cells were correlated with inhibition of plasma membrane NADH oxidase activity [63] . The same investigators have subsequently observed the similar findings with human and mouse melanoma cell lines in terms of growth inhibition, apoptosis induction, and inhibition of plasma membrane NADH oxidase [64] . Interestingly, direct injection of capsaicin into the B16 mouse melanoma transplanted in C57BL/6 mice significantly blunted the growth of tumors [64] . Capsaicin-induced apoptosis has been suggested to be regulated by Bcl-2 and the protein phosphatase, calcineurin [65] . In another study, capsaicin-induced apoptotic death of cultured human gastric cancer cells, which appeared to be mediated via overexpression of the p53  tumor suppressor gene and/or c-myc  proto-oncogene [66] . One of the important cellular mediators of cellular processes in response to diversified extracellular stimuli including oxidants, UV, mitogens, cytokines, viruses, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-1 (IL-1), etc. is a nuclear transcription factor NF-κB [67–71] . Upon activation by external signals, NF-κB is migrated to the nucleus where it binds to a specific segment of DNA, thereby triggering expression of a variety of rapid-response genes involved in some important physiological reactions, such as inflammation, cell adhesion, viral replication, immune response, and proliferation. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) has been suggested as a second messenger in a signal transduction pathway for activation of NF-κB [72, 73] . According to the study of Singh et al. [74] , capsaicin abrogates the activation of NF-κB by TPA, as well as by TNF-α, which may provide a mechanistic basis for the possible anti-tumor promoting activity of capsaicin. Another eukaryotic transcription factor that is responsive to ROS and is hence, regulated by cellular redox status is activator protein 1 (AP-1) [67] . The regulation of AP-1 in response to external stimuli is considered to be mediated by members of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family, among which c-jun -N-terminal kinase (JNK; also known as stress-activated protein kinase abbreviated as SAPK) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) isoforms are best characterized. There is some evidence that JNK and ERK exert opposite effects on apoptosis [75] . Capsaicin induced apoptosis in cultured Jurkat cells through generation of ROS [76] . When treated to these cells at a concentration of 300 μM, capsaicin rapidly activated JNK: the activity was detectable as early as 5 min after the treatment, while ERK activity was not affected under the same experimental conditions [76] . Despite the activation of JNK by capsaicin, there was no induction of AP-1 activity. On the contrary, capsaicin blocked the TPA-induced AP-1 activation [76] . The latter finding, together with the previous observation by Singh et al. [74] on suppression of TPA-induced NF-κB activation by capsaicin, may provide important molecular basis for anti-tumor promoting potential of this vanilloid.  4.2 Gingerol and paradol Ginger (Zingiber officinale  Roscoe, Zingiberaceae) is among the most frequently and heavily consumed dietary condiments throughout the world. Besides its extensive use as a spice, the rhizome of ginger has also been used in traditional oriental herbal medicine for the management of such symptoms as common cold, digestive disorders, rheumatism, neurologia, colic and motion-sickness. The oleoresin from rhizomes of ginger contains [6]-gingerol (1-[4′-hydroxy-3′-methoxyphenyl]-5-hydroxy-3-decanone) and its homologs as pungent ingredients that have been found to possess many interesting pharmacological and physiological activities, such as anti-inflammatory, analgesic, antipyretic, antihepatotoxic, and cardiotonic effects [77, 78] . The chemical structure of [6]-gingerol that is known as a major pungent and pharmacologically active principle of ginger is shown in Fig. 3 . Gingerol has been found to possess substantial antioxidant activity as determined by inhibition of phospholipid peroxidation induced by the FeCl3 –ascorbate system [79] . The antioxidative properties of gingerol and other constituents of ginger have been confirmed in various in vitro and in vivo test systems [80, 81] . Gingerol also exerts an inhibitory effect on xanthine oxidase [82] responsible for generation of superoxide anion. Guh et al. [83] reported concentration-dependent inhibition by gingerol of arachidonic acid-induced platelet aggregation and formation of thromboxane B2  and prostaglandin D2 . The compound also completely abolished phosphoinositide breakdown induced by arachidonic acid. Gingerol, shogaol and other structurally-related substances in ginger inhibit prostaglandin and leukotriene biosynthesis through suppression of 5-lipoxygenase or prostaglandin synthetase [84–87] . Since tumor promotion is closely associated with inflammation and oxidative stress, it is likely that a compound with a strong inhibitory effect on the arachidonic acid metabolism would have anti-tumor promoting potential. In line with this notion, our recent study has demonstrated that gingerol protects TPA-induced ear edema, epidermal ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) activity, and skin tumor promotion in female ICR mice [88] . Furthermore, topical application of the ginger extract 30 min prior to TPA led to dramatic protection against DMBA-initiated skin carcinogenesis in SENCAR mice [89] and suppressed TPA-caused induction of epidermal ODC and its mRNA expression, as well as cyclooxygenase (COX) and lipoxygenase activities [89] . Azoxymethane-induced intestinal carcinogenesis in rats was significantly suppressed by dietary administration of gingerol [90] . Gingerol was reported as one of the most active constituents contained in traditional oriental herbal medication, `Keishi-ka-kei-to' that exhibited substantial inhibitory effects on pulmonary metastasis in mice transplanted with B16F10 melanoma cells [91] . [6]-Paradol (1-[4′-hydroxy-3′-methoxyphenyl]-3-decanone; Fig. 3 ), a pungent compound isolated from the seeds of Grains of Paradise (Aframomum melegueta  Roscoe, Zingiberaceae), as well as from the rhizome of ginger, also attenuated promotion of skin carcinogenesis and TPA-induced ear edema in female ICR mice [92] . Both [6]-gingerol and [6]-paradol induce apoptosis in HL-60 cells [36] .  4.3 Curcumin Curcumin (diferuloylmethane; Fig. 4  ) is a yellow odorless pigment isolated from the rhizome of turmeric (Curcuma longa  L., Zingiberaceae). Curcumin possesses anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties [93–102] . This yellow-coloured compound inhibits mutagenicity of certain chemical carcinogens [103–105] and also hampers their covalent DNA binding in vivo [106] , as well as, in vitro [107, 108] . Curcumin also protected against chemically-induced liver damage in experimental animals [109, 110] . Its anticarcinogenic activity was evaluated in many animal tumor models [reviewed in Refs. [111–113] ]. One of the most prominent effects curcumin exerts on experimental carcinogenesis is its capability to inhibit tumor promotion [113–116] . Thus, curcumin was reported to alleviate TPA-induced skin tumor promotion and epidermal ODC mRNA expression [115] , as well as, ODC activity [114] . Topical application of curcumin onto dorsal skins of mice significantly inhibited epidermal COX and lipoxygenase [117] . Colonic mucosal COX and lipoxygenase activities were suppressed by dietary curcumin, which appears to account for its chemopreventive effects on colon carcinogenesis. Likewise, F344 rats fed curcumin in the diet exhibited reduced catalytic activities of phospholipase A2  and phospholipase Cγ1 that are involved in arachidonic acid release from cellular phospholipid [118] . It also attenuates oxidative DNA damage in mouse epidermis [116] and in cultured mouse fibroblast cells [119] . The compound was found to suppress the generation of ROS including superoxide and hydrogen peroxide in peritoneal macrophages [120, 121] . Its antioxidant effects were confirmed in various systems. It is of interest to note that tetrahydrocurcumin, that is one of the plausible metabolites of curcumin, exhibits stronger antioxidative [102] and anti-inflammatory [97] activities than does curcumin. Curcumin inhibits lipopolysaccharide- and interferon-γ-induced production of nitric oxide in macrophages [122] or nitrite in mouse peritoneal cells [123] , possibly by suppression of nitric oxide synthase. More recently, Chan et al. [124] have reported the inhibition by curcumin of inducible nitric oxide synthase gene expression in isolated BALB/c mouse peritoneal macrophages and also in the livers of lipopolysaccharide-injected mice. TPA-induced protein kinase C activation and c-jun  expression were markedly suppressed by curcumin in mouse fibroblast cells [125] . When applied topically on the dorsal side of mouse skin, curcumin significantly inhibited expression of such proto-oncogenes as c-fos , c-jun , and c-myc [126] . Curcumin also exhibited inhibitory effects on epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor kinase activity in cultured human epidermoid carcinoma A431 [127] or NIH3T3 cells [128] . Other types of protein kinases were also found to be inhibited by this compound in a non-competitive manner [129] . The pleiotropic effects of curcumin appear to be mediated at least in part through inhibition of transcription factors [130] . According to a recent study by Huang et al. [131] , curcumin suppresses TPA-responsive element-binding activity of c-Jun/AP-1, which may account for the anti-tumor promoting effect of this chemopreventive agent. More recently, curcumin has been reported to inhibit TNF-α-induced binding of AP-1 to DNA in bovine aortic endothelial cells [132] . Besides interfering with AP-1 activation, curcumin has been shown to suppress the activation of NF-κB [133] that is another important eukaryotic transcription factor. The suppression of protein kinases, ODC, and nuclear transcription factors by curcumin suggests that this phenolic compound can act as a cytostatic agent by interfering with certain signal transduction pathways that are critical for cell growth and proliferation. Indeed, curcumin possesses antiproliferative activity [134, 135] and the capability of inducing programmed death or apoptosis in cancer cells [34, 35] . Furthermore, curcumin exhibited synergistic effects on induction of differentiation in HL-60 cells when combined with all-trans  retinoic acid or 1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 [113] . It also has a strong inhibitory effect on farnesyl protein transferase [136] that plays a crucial role in functional activation of Ras protein. A recent study by Ciolino et al. [137] has revealed inhibition of cytochrome P 450 1A1 activity and formation of carcinogen-DNA adducts in 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene-treated human mammary epithelial carcinoma (MCF-7) cells by competitively binding to the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Besides preventing malignant transformation, the compound has antimetastatic potential as demonstrated by suppression of matrix metalloproteinase-9 in the human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line [138] .  4.4 Diarylheptanoids structurally-related to curcuminoids Diarylheptanoids structurally-related to curcumin are present in certain plants of ginger family (Zingiberaceae) and have been reported to possess a strong anti-inflammatory activity. For instance, yakuchinone A (1-[4′-hydroxy-3′-methoxyphenyl]-7-phenyl-3-heptanone) and yakuchinone B (1-[4′-hydroxy-3′-methoxyphenyl]-7-phenylhept-1-en-3-one) which are present in Alpinia oxyphylla  Miquel have been reported to be strong inhibitors of prostaglandin biosynthesis in vitro [85, 87] . Like curcumin, these substances have a diarylheptanoid moiety with a carbonyl functional group (refer to the structures in Fig. 4 ) and are hence, anticipated to exhibit potential cancer chemopreventive activities. Results of our recent study showed that topical application of the methanol extract of A. oxyphylla  to the dorsal epidermis of mice during the process of tumor promotion markedly suppressed the papilloma formation [33] . The extract also attenuated the mouse ear edema induced by the tumor promoter, TPA [33] . Subsequent studies have revealed that yakuchinone A and yakuchinone B, major pungent ingredients derived from A. oxyphylla , can act as anti-tumor promoters as determined by their ability to suppress phorbol ester-induced ODC activation and papilloma formation in mouse skin [139, 140] . TPA-stimulated superoxide generation and TNF-α production in HL-60 cells and on DNA binding of AP-1 in NIH3T3 cells were also suppressed by the above compounds [139, 140] . Furthermore, both yakuchinone A and yakuchinone B induce apoptotic death in HL-60 cells, which accounts for their antiproliferative activity [139] . Phenolic diarylheptanoids from Alpinia officinarum  Hance (Zingiberaceae), structurally analogous to yakuchinone A and yakuchinone B, and non-phenolic diarylheptanoids present in a Thai medicinal plant, Curcuma xanthorrhiza  (Zingiberaceae), also exhibit strong anti-inflammatory effects [86, 141] . Certain diarylheptanoids isolated from the seeds of Alpinia blepharocalyx  K. Schum mitigated collagen-, arachidonic acid- and adenosine diphosphate-induced platelet aggregation of human blood [142] and suppressed nitric oxide production in lipopolysaccharide-activated murine macrophages in vitro [143] . Bioassay-directed fractionation of the ethanol extract of Curcuma zedoaria  (Zingiberaceae) afforded demethoxy- and bisdemethoxycurcumin, as well as curcumin, which were cytotoxic against human ovarian cancer cells [144] . The same diarylheptanoids were also found in C. longa  L. and displayed topoisomerase I and II inhibitory activity [145] . It will be worthwhile investigating chemopreventive effects of these novel diarylheptanoids, particularly with regard to their anti-tumor promotional potential.  4.5 Resveratrol Resveratrol (3,5,4′-trihydroxy-trans -stilbene; Fig. 5  ), a phytoalexin present in grapes and other plants, has potent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities which have been considered to be responsible for beneficial effects of red wine consumption on coronary heart disease [146–148] . This triphenolic stilbene has been suggested as a potential cancer chemopreventive agent based on its striking inhibitory effects on diverse cellular events associated with tumor initiation, promotion, and progression [149] . Resveratrol has been reported to be a potent inhibitor of hepatic cytochrome P 450-linked alkoxyresorufin O -dealkylase activities [150] responsible for oxidative metabolism of many carcinogenic polynuclear aromatic carcinogens. It also induces phase-2 detoxification enzymes, such as NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase [149] . Recent work by Uenobe et al. [151] demonstrated an antimutagenic activity of resveratrol against the foodborne heterocyclic amine, 3-amino-1,4-dimethyl-5H-pyrido[4,3-b ]indole (Trp-P-1) in bacteria. Resveratrol attenuated PC12 cell death induced by ter -butyl hydroperoxide in the presence of ferric ion [152] or by ethanol [153] , and was found to be protective against cytotoxicity and NF-κB activation induced by oxidized lipoproteins in PC12 cells [154, 155] . In addition, the compound inhibited growth of human breast epithelial cells in culture [156] . Proliferation of K-562 human erythroleukemia cells and P-815 murine mastocytoma cells was also suppressed by resveratrol treatment, which might be associated with inhibition of ribonucleotide reductase [157] . One of the plausible mechanisms that could account for the chemopreventive activity of resveratrol is suppression of prostaglandin biosynthesis catalyzed COX. Prostaglandins are known to play pivotal roles in pathogenesis of malignancy, particularly in colon and mammary carcinogenesis and suppression of prostaglandin biosynthesis through selective inhibition of COX is hence, now regarded as an important cancer chemopreventive strategy. Resveratrol was shown to inhibit COX-1 activity in microsomes derived from sheep seminal vesicles [149] . More recently, Subbaramaiah et al. [158] have reported that resveratrol inhibits the catalytic activity of the inducible isozyme COX-2 in cultured human mammary epithelial cells with and without TPA treatment. Likewise, human recombinant COX-2 expressed in baculovirus was inhibited by resveratrol [158] . Besides inhibiting the catalytic activity of COX-2, the compound also blocked TPA-mediated induction of cox -2 mRNA in cultured human mammary epithelial cells through repression of AP-1-dependent transactivation [158] . More recently, topical application of resveratrol onto dorsal skin of CD-1 mice led to profound attenuation of oxidative stress and expression of epidermal TGF-β1 and c-fos  induced by TPA, but the induction of cox -1, cox -2, c-myc , c-jun  and TNF-α mRNAs was not affected [159] . As mentioned earlier, some anti-inflammatory chemopreventive agents have been found to suppress growth and proliferation of transformed cells through induction of programmed death or apoptosis [30–32] . Although resveratrol exerts anti-inflammatory effects through selective suppression of COX-2, little information is available in the literature in regards to its apoptosis-inducing capability in tumor cells. Mgbonyebi et al. [156] reported the growth inhibition by resveratrol of several types of human breast epithelial cells, which was independent of estrogen receptor status of the cells. Although the antiproliferative activity of resveratrol was demonstrated [156] , the mode of cell death induced by this phytochemical was not clarified in the above investigation. Suppression of HL-60 cells by resveratrol was shown to be mediated via induction of apoptosis as determined by nuclear fragmentation, chromatin condensation, a time-related increase in the frequency of subdiploid (apoptotic) cells, and internucleosomal DNA fragmentation [160] . Besides suppression of proliferation, the compound induced differentiation of HL-60 cells at concentrations as low as 30 μM, which appears to be associated with reversible cell cycle arrest at the S-phase check point [161] . Moreover, resveratrol was found to induce apoptosis in HL-60 cells by triggering the CD95 signaling system [162] . The growth of estrogen-dependent T47D breast carcinoma cells was also suppressed by resveratrol treatment [162] . The latter finding is contradictory to the result of a previous work by Gehm et al. [163] , who demonstrated stimulation of T47D cell proliferation by resveratrol through interaction with the estrogen receptor. The exact reason for this discrepancy remains unknown. In another study, resveratrol caused estrogen mimic induction of prolactin secretion in the immortalized pituitary cell line PR1, but it exhibited neither estrogen receptor binding nor growth stimulatory activity in these cells [164] .  4.6 Epigallocatechin gallate Epidemiologic, as well as laboratory studies, have revealed that increased consumption of green tea has been associated with reduced frequencies of several types of malignant tumors [165–169] . Among many polyphenolic compounds isolated from green tea, (−)-epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG; Fig. 5 ) is believed to be a key active constituent in terms of cancer chemopreventive potential [113, 165, 170–172] . The strong antioxidative activity retained in this polyphenol has been confirmed in numerous in vivo and in vitro studies [173–186] , which appears to contribute in part to the antimutagenic and anticarcinogenic effects of green tea. Thus, pretreatment of SENCAR mice with EGCG significantly ameliorated TPA-induced infiltration and diminished the formation of hydrogen peroxide and oxidized DNA bases including 8-hydroxy-2′-deoxyguanosine (8-OH-dG) and 5-hydroxymethyl-2′-deoxyuridine in the skin [174] . Likewise, TPA-induced oxidative DNA base modification was inhibited dose-dependently by EGCG in cultured HeLa cells [175] . EGCG and structurally-related green tea catechins were found to be stronger inhibitors of lipid peroxidation in rat liver homogenates than such antioxidants as glutathione, ascorbic acid, tocopherol, butylated hydroxytoluene, and butylated hydroxyanisole [176] . The antioxidant activities of theaflavins and thearubigin purified from the infusion of black tea leaves were lower than those of green tea polyphenols [176] , although the total lyophilized infusion products of green tea and black tea leaves were equally active. EGCG exhibited a strong inhibitory effect on Cu2+ -mediated oxidation of low density lipoprotein (LDL) in vitro and was again more potent than theaflavin, α-tocopherol, and butylated hydroxytoluene in this regard [177] . Kidney slices from rats subjected to oral administration of EGCG (50 mg/kg body weight) for 7 days or fed 3% green tea leaf powder for 50 days exhibited lesser extent of ter -butyl hydroperoxide-induced lipid peroxidation, compared with the control animals [178] . EGCG, as well as green tea given to rats in drinking water was protective against hepatotoxicity and liver nuclear 8-OH-dG formation induced by the carcinogen 2-nitropropane [179] . Pentachlorophenol-induced hepatic 8-OH-dG formation in male B6C3F1  mice was reduced by oral administration of EGCG [180] . Peroxynitrite-mediated formation of 8-OH-dG in calf thymus DNA and nitration of tyrosine to 3-nitrotyrosine were suppressed by EGCG [181] . Strand scission in Escherichia coli  pUC18 plasmid DNA by gamma-ray or beta-ray was inhibited in the presence of EGCG, which might be attributable to its hydroxyl radical scavenging effect [182, 183] . Among the tea flavonoids tested, EGCG exerted the most pronounced protection against oxidation of LDL as revealed by prolongation of the oxidation time [184] . The EGCG was found to block the production of ROS derived from NADPH-cytochrome P 450-mediated oxidation of the cooked meat carcinogen, 2-amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5-f ]quinoline (IQ) [185] . The EGCG and epigallocatechin were found to inhibit xanthine oxidase [186] . The EGCG has also been reported to attenuate the nitric oxide production [187, 188] , which appears to be mediated through suppression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) or its mRNA expression [187, 189] . The electrophorectic mobility shift assay revealed that EGCG blunted activation of NF-κB responsible for iNOS induction [187] . These results indicate that EGCG inhibits the binding of NF-κB to iNOS promoter, thereby hampering the transcription of iNOS gene. Interferon-gamma and lipopolysaccharide-induced nitrite production in mouse peritoneal cells was also inhibited by EGCG [190] . The chemopreventive effects of EGCG and other structurally-related green tea polyphenols have been investigated using diverse rodent tumor models (recently reviewed in Ref. [191] ). Thus, EGCG exhibited protective effects against N -ethyl-N ′-nitrosoguanidine-induced murine duodenum carcinogenesis [165, 192, 193] , N -methyl-N ′-nitrosoguanidine-induced rat gastric carcinogenesis [193, 194] , diethylnitrosamine-initiated and phenobarbital-promoted formation of hepatic preneoplastic foci in male F344 rats [195] , mouse skin carcinogenesis [170, 196–200] , tobacco-specific nitrosamine-induced mouse pulmonary tumorigenesis [[201] , reviewed in Ref. [202] ], rat sarcoma induction following subcutaneous injection of benzo[a]pyrene [203] , and spontaneous hepatoma formation in C3H/HeNCrj mice [204] . One of the most plausible mechanisms underlying the chemopreventive activity of EGCG is suppression of promotion of carcinogenesis [170, 193, 196, 197] examined in animals and also in cultured cells [205] . Thus, EGCG has been reported to influence some biochemical events related to tumor promotion, such as suppression of mouse epidermal ODC activity induced by TPA [197] or okadaic acid [170] , inhibition of protein kinase C activation induced by teleocidin [171] or TPA [206] , attenuation of okadaic acid-stimulated production of TNF-α and its mRNA expression in cultured BALB/3T3 cells [172, 207] , inhibition of binding of tumor promoters to the particulate fraction of mouse skin [170] or to its receptor protein kinase C [206] , mitigation of TPA-induced oxidative damage in mouse skin [174] and cultured cells [175] , enhancement of gap junctional intercellular communication [208] . The ODC activity in gastric mucosal cells of N -methyl-N ′-nitrosoguanidine-treated rats was also reduced by oral administration of EGCG [194] . TPA-induced expression of ODC gene, protein kinase C gene, and c-myc  proto-oncogene in mouse skin was all repressed by topical application of EGCG [209] . Likewise, increases in the transcript level of epidermal IL-1α gene in SENCAR mice treated with different types of tumor promoters were suppressed by topical pretreatment with EGCG [210] . In contrast, EGCG alone stimulated the production of IL-1α and its mRNA expression in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells in culture [211] . EGCG abrogated TPA-induced activation of protein kinase C, c-jun  expression, and transformation in cultured mouse fibroblasts in culture [212] . Very recently, Dong et al. [213] reported that EGCG and theaflavins inhibited EGF- or TPA-induced transformation of JB6 mouse epidermal cell line which was associated with their repression of AP-1-dependent transcriptional activity and its DNA binding activity. The inhibition of AP-1 activation by these substances appears to be mediated via down-regulation of JNK, but not the ERK pathway [213] . The anticarcinogenic, as well as antigenotoxic activities of EGCG have been confirmed in many other in vivo and in vitro bioassays (extensively reviewed in Ref. [192] and see references therein) although some studies revealed no protective effects [214] . Besides inhibiting the tumor promotion, EGCG administered intraperitoneally and the green tea polyphenol fraction given orally or intraperitoneally caused growth inhibition and/or regression of experimentally induced skin papillomas in mice [198] . Topically applied green tea polyphenol fraction also inhibited the progression of papillomas to squamous cell carcinoma [199] . Similarly, i.p. injection of this polyphenol caused growth inhibition and regression of tumors arising from human prostate cancer cells, PC-3 and LNCaP 104-R, subcutaneously inoculated into nude mice [215] . Other structurally-related catechins, such as (−)-epicatechin gallate, were not active in this respect. EGCG also effectively suppressed the growth of human mammary cancer cells (MCF-7) in athymic mice [215] . In line with these in vivo findings, EGCG downregulated the aberrant hyperproliferation of c-myc  oncogene-transfected mouse mammary epithelial cells as demonstrated by its ability to suppress the anchorage-independent growth of these cells in soft agar [216] . Aberrant hyperproliferation of spontaneously immortalized murine mammary epithelial cells subjected to initiation with a chemical carcinogen or by oncogene transfection and their subsequent growth in syngenic mice were also blocked by EGCG treatment [217] . In contrast to the above positive findings, EGCG given as a diet to female Sprague–Dawley rats during the late promotion or progression stages of 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene-initiated mammary carcinogenesis exhibited no significant protective effects [218] . There have been a series of papers published, which deal with the growth inhibitory or antiproliferative activities of green tea polyphenols in numerous types of tumor cells [[219, 220] , and vide infra]. Like other chemopreventive phytochemicals listed above, the growth inhibitory effects of EGCG in cancer cells appears in part to be mediated via apoptosis. Hibasami et al. [221] reported that human lymphoid leukemia Molt 4B cells exposed to EGCG underwent programmed death as determined by appearance of DNA ladder on agarose gel electrophoresis. Other green tea polyphenols, such as epigallocatechin and epicatechin gallate, also inhibited growth of Molt 4B cells via induction of apoptotic death [221, 222] . Each of these polyphenols exhibited an inhibitory effect on the growth of human lung cancer cell line PC-9, possibly through arrest of the cell cycle in the G2 /M phase [166, 223] . In a subsequent study, the apoptosis-inducing activity of EGCG in PC-9 cells has been found to be synergistically enhanced by combined treatment with other chemopreventive agents, including sulindac and tamoxifen [224] . In another study, EGCG induced apoptosis of human epidermoid carcinoma cell line (A431), human carcinoma keratinocyte cell line (HaCaT), human prostate carcinoma cell line (DU145), and mouse lymphoma cell line (L5178Y) and its apoptosis inducing activity was related to the cell cycle arrest in the G0 –G1  phase [225] . Antiproliferative activity of EGCG against A431 cells has been attributed to its suppression of EGF binding to its receptor and subsequent autophosphorylation of the EGF receptor required for EGF signaling [226] . The EGCG and epigallocatechin treated to Ehrlich ascites tumor cells caused significant reduction in cell viability [227] . While epigallocatechin suppressed the tyrosine phosphorylation of 42 kDa and 45 kDa proteins in treated cells, EGCG was not inhibitory on the protein tyrosine kinase activity [227] . The growth of premalignant and malignant cells derived respectively from dysplastic leukoplakia and squamous carcinoma of oral epithelial origin was also inhibited by EGCG, which was considered to be associated with cell cycle arrest in the G1  phase [228, 229] . The malignant oral epithelium was less responsive to EGCG than normal and dysplastic cells [229] . Treatment of benzo[a]pyrene-initiated human mammary epithelial 184-B5 cells with EGCG led to increases in sub G0  population and apoptotic cell death, which might account for suppression of aberrant proliferation in these cells [230] . Human stomach KATO III cells also underwent apoptotic death when exposed to EGCG [231] . When different types of polyphenols derived from green tea extracts were treated to human lung and colon cancer cell lines, EGCG and epigallocatechin exhibited strong growth inhibitory effects followed by epicatechin gallate and epicatechin [232] . The incubation of the human lung tumor cell line H661 with EGCG resulted in apoptosis, which was considered to be mediated by hydrogen peroxide produced by this polyphenol [232] . EGCG was proven to be the most potent green tea catechin in terms of suppressing the growth of several human prostate cancer cell lines, including LNCaP, PC-3, and DU145 [233] . The selective inhibition of 5α-reductase by EGCG suggests that its antiproliferative activity against prostate cancer cells is mediated via modulation of androgen action [234] . The antiproliferative and apoptosis-inducing effects of EGCG were shown to be specific for tumor cells [225, 235] , which was partly associated with its differential modulation of c-myc  and c-fos  expression [235] . EGCG also possesses a potential antimetastatic activity as revealed by inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase activity in mouse Lewis lung carcinoma cells [236] . Furthermore, administration of EGCG inhibited metastasis of mouse B16 melanoma cells [237] . Adhesion of mouse lung carcinoma cells to endothelial cells was also inhibited by EGCG [238] . It also reduced the lifespan of cultured monoblastoid leukemia and HT29 colon adenocarcinoma cells through direct inactivation of telomerase [239] , an enzyme essential for unlocking the proliferation of cancer cells.   5 Concluding remarks A wide variety of phenolic substances present in dietary and medicinal plants possess striking antioxidative and anti-inflammatory properties, which to some extent, contribute to their cancer chemopreventive potential. Examples are pungent vanilloids in red pepper and ginger, and diarylheptanoids isolated from certain medicinal plants of ginger family. These phenolic substances have the ability to inhibit mouse skin tumor promotion and to abrogate various biochemical processes induced or mediated by the tumor promoters including TPA and okadaic acid. They also induce apoptosis in premalignant or cancerous cells. Resveratrol, a phytoalexin present in grapes and red wine and EGCG, one of the major antioxidative polyphenols contained in green tea, have been shown to possess a broad spectrum of anticarcinogenic effects. Recent studies have revealed that resveratrol and EGCG suppress growth and proliferation of various types of tumor cells via induction of apoptosis or arrest of a specific phase of the cell cycle. Most of the naturally occurring chemopreventive phenolics exert multifacet action, and any clinical applications using these substances should be based on the precise understanding of the physiologically relevant action mechanism(s).   Acknowledgements This work was supported by a grant from Korea Science Engineering Foundation through the Research Center for New Drug Development of Seoul National University and also by a grant for '98 Good Health R&D project (HMP-96-D-2-1034) sponsored by the Ministry of Health and Welfare, Republic of Korea.   
