 n- Hexane is metabolized by microsomal enzymes giving rise to several oxidation intermediates (Phase I metabolites), including 1-hexanol, 2-hexanol, 3-hexanol, 2-hexanone, 5-hydroxy-2-hexanone, 2,5-hexanediol, 4,5-dihydroxy-2-hexanone and 2,5-hexanedione (‘free’ 2,5-HD), the last one being regarded as the ultimate neurotoxic agent (Perbellini et al., 1981; Mutti et al., 1984; IPCS, 1991 ). Most of n- hexane metabolites—but not 2,5-HD and 2-hexanone—undergo Phase II biotransformation and are excreted as glucuronide conjugates (-G). Their determination by conventional techniques requires preliminary hydrolysis (Fedtke and Bolt, 1987a,b; Kawai et al., 1990; Perbellini et al., 1990; Soriano et al., 1996 ), yielding to the ‘total 2,5-HD’ but also a number of analytical artifacts, i.e. γ-valerolactone and furan derivatives. A new method for the direct determination of both Phases I and II metabolites of n- hexane has been recently developed with the use of the hyphenated technique liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS; Andreoli et al., 1998; Manini et al., 1998 ). The role of this new technique in the field of metabolism studies is becoming more important, documented by the increasing number of studies published every year all over the world (Niessen, 1998 ). The advantages of using a mass spectrometer, a system sensitive, specific and selective, capable of analyte identification and confirmation, as a detector have been already demonstrated in the case of the on-line coupling of gas chromatography with mass spectrometry. The application field of gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) is still limited to volatile and non-thermally labile substances, with relatively low molecular weight, approximately 10% of all the organic compounds. On the contrary, liquid chromatography is suitable for the analysis of polar compounds without the need of prior derivatization and is compatible with aqueous matrices, such as urine, without the need of sample pretreatment. These peculiarities make chromatographic techniques coupled with mass spectrometry suitable for a wide range of applications and open new perspectives in the study of the metabolic fate of drugs, pesticides, natural substances and environmental pollutants. LC-MS allows the analysis of n- hexane metabolites in untreated urine samples without the risk of artifact generation. Objectives of this study were: (i) to assess the analytical validity of conventional techniques and related assumptions; (ii) to evaluate the metabolic pattern of conjugates and unconjugates n- hexane metabolites by hyphenated techniques, i.e. LC-MS and GC-MS; and (iii) to estimate the contribution of different methods of sample pretreatment in the production of 2,5-HD and analytical artifacts.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Animals and chemicals Sprague Dawley rats (200–250 g) were obtained from Charles River Laboratories (Calco, Como, Italy). The animals were housed under conditions of constant temperature and humidity, and automatic photocyle. They had free access to food and water, and only to water during urine collection. All experiments were carried out in compliance with the European Community Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. 2-Hexanol, 2-hexanone, 2,5-hexanedione, γ-valerolactone, 2,5-hexanediol were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany); 3-hexanol, 2,5-dimethylfuran from Fluka (Buchs, Switzerland); cyclohexanone (I.S.) from Sigma. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) water, methanol, acetonitrile and dichloromethane were obtained from Lab-Scan (Dublin, Ireland); n- hexane, sodium chloride, hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide from Carlo Erba (Milan, Italy). β-Glucuronidase/arylsulphatase from Helix Pomatia was from Boehringer Mannheim Italia (Monza, Italy).  2.2 Animal exposure and urine collection Rats were treated with 1.4 mmol of pure n- hexane by subcutaneous injection of the solvent once a day on 3 consecutive days. After the treatment, the rats were placed in individual metabolic cages provided with urine-feces separators and 15 h urine samples (17.8±3.8 ml) were collected over NaN3  0.1%. Urine samples were stored at −20°C until analysis.  2.3 Sample preparation Rat urine was divided into four aliquots, undergoing different preparation prior to chromatographic analysis: (a) no hydrolysis; (b) enzymatic hydrolysis: 2 ml of urine were mixed with 4 ml of 0.5 M acetate buffer, pH 5.0, and 20 μl of β-glucuronidase/arylsulphatase, then incubated for 24 h at 37°C; (c) acid hydrolysis: 2 ml of urine were mixed with 100 μl of HCl 37%, pH<1.0, then put in a boiling water bath for 30 min; and (d) enzymatic hydrolysis followed by acid hydrolysis. Each aliquot was ultrafiltered before LC-MS analysis. Samples for GC-MS analysis were extracted with a solution of I.S. in dichloromethane and the organic phase was evaporated to small volume in nitrogen current.  2.4 Sample analyses The chromatographic analyses of n- hexane metabolites in rat urine samples were carried out as described earlier (Andreoli et al., 1998; Manini et al., 1998 ). GC-MS analysis of all the samples, prior and after hydrolysis was performed by using a Hewlett Packard HP 6890 gas chromatograph coupled with a HP 5973 Mass Selective Detector (MSD). Separations were obtained on a HP-5MS capillary column (30 m×0.25 mm, 0.25 μm film thickness) using hydrogen as a carrier gas. Instrument control, data acquisition and processing were performed with a Hewlett Packard ChemStation (Hewlett Packard, Palo Alto, CA, USA). LC-MS analyses were carried out using a Perkin Elmer series 200 liquid chromatograph coupled with a PE-Sciex API 100 single-quadrupole mass spectrometer (Sciex, Thornhill, Canada) equipped with a heated nebulizer (HN) interface for atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI) and an ionspray interface for electrospray ionization (ES). A Power Macintosh 7200/120 computer was used for instrument control, data acquisition and processing. LC-MS-MS experiments were performed on a PE-Sciex API 300 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer. Chromatography of conjugates was obtained under ion-suppressed reversed-phase conditions, by using high-speed (3 cm, 3 μm) columns and formic acid (2 mM) as modifier in the mobile phase. Glucuronides were identified in untreated urine samples by electrospray (ES) LC-MS in negative-ion mode and peak identity was confirmed by LC-MS-MS experiments. For the analysis of free metabolites in hydrolyzed samples, the APCI interface was used in positive-ion mode after separation on a C-18 column.   3 Results In untreated urine samples, four glucuronides were identified and characterized by LC-MS, then confirmed by LC-MS-MS: 2-hexanol-G and 5-hydroxy-2-hexanone-G represented the main conjugates, and 4,5-dihydroxy-2-hexanone-G was clearly detectable, whereas 2,5-hexanediol-G was identified only in trace amount. ‘Free’ 2,5-HD was detectable in non-hydrolyzed samples both by GC-MS and LC-MS (Fig. 1  ). Identification and analytical basis for the quantitation of n -hexane glucuronides, whose authentic reference materials are not available, have been reported in a previous paper (Manini et al., 1998 ). The proportion of main metabolites (μmol excreted in the 15 h following administration) after different sample treatments is shown in Table 1  . Values are arithmetic means and SEM of six urine samples. Enzymatic hydrolysis did not increase the amount of 2,5-HD as compared to untreated samples, nor did it produce γ-valerolactone. Moreover, LC-MS analysis of hydrolyzates allowed the identification of the following deconjugated metabolites, i.e. 5-hydroxy-2-hexanone, 4,5-dihydroxy-2-hexanone and 2,5-hexanediol. On the contrary, acid hydrolysis led to substantial increases in 2,5-HD (the so called ‘total’ 2,5-HD) and produced γ-valerolactone. Owing to its complete transformation into 2,5-HD and γ-valerolactone, 4,5-dihydroxy-2-hexanone was no longer detectable in LC-MS chromatograms from samples undergone acid hydrolysis, while such a treatment also reduced (by 70%) the concentration of 5-hydroxy-2-hexanone. In GC-MS chromatograms of both enzymatic and acid hydrolyzates, measurable amounts of 2,5-dimethylfuran were found. No differences were found between acid and enzymatic followed by acid hydrolysis (not shown). The effect of acid hydrolysis on the metabolite proportions in the second aliquot of the urine of rats 1 and 2 is shown in Fig. 2  . In urine from rat 1, the n -hexanol-G to 5-hydroxy-2-hexanone-G ratio was 2.85, whereas such metabolites were excreted in comparable amounts by rat 2. Acid hydrolysis of n -hexanol-G quantitatively led to the corresponding n -hexanols. The hydrolysis of 5-hydroxy-2-hexanone was not complete (residual conjugated metabolite 35%), giving rise to a variable increase in 2,5-HD (by 440 and 2330% in rats 1 and 2, respectively) and to the generation of γ-valerolactone (undetectable in untreated samples), in addition to a considerable amount of free 5-hydroxy-2-hexanone, especially in the case of rat 2. As a result, whereas ‘free’ 2,5-HD was six-fold higher in urine from rat 1 than in samples from rat 2, comparable amounts of ‘total’ 2,5-HD were found after extensive acid hydrolysis.  4 Discussion The origin of 2,5-HD and sources of analytical artifacts in urine samples from rats treated with n- hexane were identified and characterized by using both GC-MS and LC-MS. Complementary information obtained from such techniques was useful to clarify controversial issues concerning n- hexane metabolism. The proposed scheme of n -hexane metabolism is shown in Fig. 1 . In a previous paper, we demonstrated that the total 2,5-HD is produced during acid hydrolysis starting from both 4,5-dihydroxy-2-hexanone-G and 5-hydroxy-2-hexanone-G and that the artifact γ-valerolactone is also generated from the same conjugates by the acid treatment (Manini et al., 1998 ). By contrast, during enzymatic hydrolysis, 4,5-dihydroxy-2-hexanone and 5-hydroxy-2-hexanone are deconjugated, but neither γ-valerolactone nor 2,5-HD increase as compared to untreated samples. Already in 1976, it was demonstrated that 5-hydroxy-2-hexanone undergoes dehydration and cyclization in the GC inlet to 2,5-dimethyl-2,3-dihydrofuran and therefore is never detectable by GC (Di Vincenzo et al., 1976 ). For the first time, using APCI-LC-MS we detected considerable amounts of free 5-hydroxy-2-hexanone in rat urine after enzymatic or acid hydrolysis (Andreoli et al., 1998 ), which is responsible of furans in GC-MS chromatograms of hydrolyzates (both acid and enzymatic). Because 5-hydroxy-2-hexanone-G is the most abundant polioxygenated metabolite of n- hexane in rat (n -hexanol-G does not produce artifacts), this is the ‘key metabolite’ generating ‘total’ 2,5-HD, γ-valerolactone, and 2,5-dimethylfuran. The yield of hydrolysis for this compound is variable, i.e. 33–38 and 61–63% after enzymatic and acid treatment, respectively. Thus, the calculation of 4,5-dihydroxy-2-hexanone and 5-hydroxy-2-hexanone by the difference between 2,5-HD and γ-valerolactone with and without hydrolysis (Soriano et al., 1996 ), is questionable. Although based on animal experiments needing further validation in field studies, the present investigation gives rise to some conclusions relevant to the biomonitoring of n -hexane exposure. Since the variability due to pre-analytical (hydrolysis) and analytical factor should be kept as low as possible, we suggest not to use acid hydrolysis, but rather to measure ‘free’ 2,5-HD in untreated samples. ‘Free’ 2,5-HD is meaningful from a toxicological point of view, since it is thought to be responsible for the neurotoxic effects of n- hexane and methyl-n- butyl ketone. By contrast, the meaning of ‘total’ 2,5-HD is also questionable for toxicological reasons, since it results from a number of highly soluble glucuronated compounds rapidly excreted with urine and meaningless in terms of toxic risk. Although ‘total’ 2,5-HD appears correlated with airborne n -hexane (Kawai et al., 1991 ), the contribution of endogenous compounds seems not to be negligible at low levels (Perbellini et al., 1993; Mutti et al., 1993 ). Since ‘total’ 2,5-HD is not the unique product of hydrolysis of several glucuronated metabolites, reference values for ‘total’ 2,5-HD (Bavazzano et al., 1998 ) are also questionable. Despite the limited number of rats considered in these experiments, two rats repeatedly treated with the same dose of n -hexane produced different amounts of the neurotoxic metabolite 2,5-HD. From the visual inspection of Fig. 2 , it can be argued that interindividual differences exist in the biotransformation of n -hexane, resulting in different proportions among Phases I and II metabolites. Interindividual metabolic differences are ignored when exposure and the subsequent neurotoxic risk are assessed on the basis of ‘total’ 2,5-HD. Indeed, as shown in the same Fig. 2 , the urinary concentrations of 2,5-HD from both rats were overlapping. Taking into account that the risk of adverse effects is attributable not only to the intrinsic properties or toxicity of a chemical agent, but also to the susceptibility of exposed subjects, this preliminary and partial result warrants the study of metabolic profiles from n- hexane exposed subjects in relation to relevant polymorphic drug-metabolizing enzymes. Also, the use of suitable and valid techniques is a pre-requisite to characterize metabolic interactions among components of complex solvent mixtures.   Acknowledgements This work was financially supported by the European Commission (ENV-CT-96-173).   
