 Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is an acute immune-mediated polyradiculoneuropathy. An infection often precedes the onset of GBS. Although a subtype with primary axonal degeneration has recently been reported [1] , the predominant pathogenetic process is considered to be demyelination. Gangliosides are surface membrane antigens distributed predominantly in the nervous system. Antiganglioside antibodies are frequently elevated in the acute phase sera of GBS [2–4] . Among the gangliosides, LM1 (sialosylneolactotetraosylceramide) is the predominant one in the peripheral nerve myelin [5] . Anti-LM1 antibody may therefore be related to the pathogenesis of GBS. In this paper, we investigate the presence of the anti-LM1 antibody in the serum of patients with GBS and the clinical and electrophysiological features of GBS patients with the anti-LM1 IgG antibody.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Patients’ sera Serum samples were obtained from 140 consecutive patients with acute GBS within two weeks of the onset of neurologic symptoms, 24 normal controls and 147 disease controls, which included patients with chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP), 33; Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS), 47; other neuropathies, 7; multiple sclerosis, 13; collagen disease, 13; myasthenia gravis, 6 and other neurodegenerative disease, 28. All the patients with GBS met the clinical criteria defined by Asbury and Cornblath [6] . Except for the subjects with degenerative disorders and normal controls, the serum samples were collected during the acute phase or relapse.  2.2 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was performed as described elsewhere [2]  to investigate the serum anti-LM1 antibodies. Ninety-six-well Linbro microtiter plates (Flow Laboratories, McLean, VA, USA) were used. Each well was coated with 0.2 μg of antigen, with an uncoated well being used as the control. After incubation with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), serum diluted 1:40 with 1% BSA in PBS was added to each well and the plate was incubated at room temperature for 1.5 h. After each well had been washed with 0.1% BSA in PBS, peroxidase-conjugated anti-human IgM or IgG antibody (Cappel, West Chester, PA, USA), diluted 1:200 and 1:500, respectively, with 1% BSA in PBS, was added to each well and the plate was incubated at room temperature for 1.5 h. The wells then were washed with 0.1% BSA in PBS and a color reaction was obtained by incubation with 200 μl of orthophenylenediamine dihydrochloride (40 mg/dl of phosphate–citrate buffer, pH 5.0) at room temperature for 2 min. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 8 N H2 SO4 , after which the optical density (OD, 492 nm) was read with an ELISA reader (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Each OD value was corrected by subtracting the OD of a control well that had been processed the same way. Serum with an OD of more than the mean+3 SD of the ODs of the 24 normal controls was considered positive. Each serum sample positive for the anti-LM1 antibody was diluted serially from 1:40 to 1:5120 and ELISA was preformed as described. Anti-LM1 antibody titer was expressed as the maximal dilution factor that gave a corrected OD of more than 0.1. Serum samples with anti-LM1 IgG antibody were assayed for antibodies to several other gangliosides such as GM1, GM2, GM3, GM1b, GD1a, GD1b, GD3, GalNAc-GD1a, GT1b and GQ1b, and serum samples of all patients with GBS were assayed for anti-GQ1b IgG antibodies. Antibodies against those gangliosides were investigated by the use of ELISA as described previously [2] .  2.3 Thin-layer chromatogram immunostaining Thin-layer chromatogram (TLC) immunostaining was performed as described elsewhere [2]  to confirm the serum antibody reactivities with gangliosides.  2.4 Clinical features The clinical and electrophysiological features of GBS patients with the anti-LM1 IgG antibody were investigated. The clinical grade was determined as described by Hughes et al. [7] . Patients were classified electrophysiologically as having either acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (AIDP), with or without axonal degeneration (AD), acute motor axonal neuropathy, or acute motor and sensory axonal neuropathy according to the criteria described by Rees et al. [8] . Patients who had insufficient evidence of demyelination or axonal degeneration were labeled as unclassifiable.  2.5 Statistical analysis The difference in the percentages of anti-GQ1b IgG antibody-positive cases among GBS patients with or without the anti-LM1 IgG antibody was analyzed using the Fisher’s exact test.   3 Results 3.1 Investigation of serum antiganglioside antibodies Seven patients with GBS, one with CIDP and two with MFS had the IgG anti-LM1 antibody in the serum (Fig. 1  ). All the patients with anti-LM1 IgG antibody titers of 1:160 or more were GBS patients. The IgM anti-LM1 antibody was detected in only two patients, one with GBS and the other with MFS. The binding of the patients’ antibody to LM1 was confirmed by TLC-immunostaining (Fig. 2  ). Follow-up serum samples were available from three patients (patients 3, 4 and 5). Anti-LM1 IgG antibody titer decreased over the course of the disease in each patient; 1:80 on day 2 of neurological onset and 1:40 on day 7 in patient 3; 1:160 on day 3, 1:80 on day 12 and <1:40 on day 25 in patient 4; 1:640 on day 2 and <1:40 on day 22 in patient 5. No anti-LM1 antibody was detected either in the normal or in the disease controls other than CIDP and MFS. Six of seven GBS patients with the anti-LM1 IgG antibody also had antibodies against other gangliosides. In particular, five patients had the anti-GQ1b IgG antibody (Table 1  ). The anti-GQ1b IgG antibody was detected in 14 of the 140 serum samples of patients with GBS. The percentage of anti-GQ1b IgG antibody-positive cases was significantly higher in GBS cases with the anti-LM1 IgG antibody than in those without it (P <0.001).  3.2 Clinical features of GBS patients with anti-LM1 IgG antibody Of the seven cases with the anti-LM1 IgG antibody, respiratory tract infection preceded the onset of GBS in five patients and gastrointestinal tract infection in two patients. All the five patients in whom the onset of GBS was preceded by respiratory tract infection had anti-GQ1b IgG antibodies. Four of those five patients had ophthalmoplegia. One of the two patients (patient 7) with preceding gastrointestinal infection had an antibody to Campylobacter jejuni  (C. jejuni ). Electrophysiological examinations showed that four of the seven patients with the anti-LM1 IgG antibody were of the AIDP type and one patient (patient 7) was of the AIDP type with axonal damage. In the remaining two patients, no abnormal findings were seen electrophysiologically. Plasmapheresis was performed for all those patients with the anti-LM1 IgG antibody. One month after the onset of neuropathy, six patients had recovered to clinical Grade 1, whereas only patient 7 still had Grade 4.   4 Discussion We detected the IgG antibody to LM1 in the sera of 7 out of 140 (5%) GBS patients, 1 out of 33 (3.0%) CIDP patients, and 2 out of 47 (4.3%) MFS patients. The IgM antibody to LM1 was found only in two patients, each with GBS and MFS. The sera of patients with other diseases and of the normal controls did not contain anti-LM1 antibodies. Several research groups have found serum anti-LM1 antibodies in patients with demyelinating neuropathies [9–11] , however, the results are conflicting. Fredman et al. [9]  reported that 43% of GBS patients, 67% of CIDP patients and 20% of the normal controls had anti-LM1 antibodies, mostly of the IgG type. Ilyas et al. [10]  reported that 23% of GBS patients and 2.3% of the disease and normal controls had the anti-LM1 IgG antibody, but no significant elevation of anti-LM1 IgM antibody titers was detected. Yuki et al. [11]  found the IgG antibody to LM1 in 8% of GBS patients, 3% of CIDP patients and 5% of MFS patients, and the IgM antibody to LM1 in 13% of GBS patients, 7% of CIDP patients and 7% of MFS patients. These differences in results could have been caused by differences in the cut-off levels of the methods used and in the immunogenetic background. We then investigated the clinical and electrophysiological features of GBS patients with the anti-LM1 IgG antibody, which have never been reported so far. Considering that LM1 is the predominant ganglioside in the peripheral nerve myelin, the anti-LM1 antibody can possibly play a role as a demyelinating factor in the pathogenesis of GBS. Of the seven patients with the anti-LM1 IgG antibody in this study, demyelination was confirmed in five, and two patients were labeled as unclassifiable. Only patient 7, subsequent to C. jejuni  infection, had electrophysiological findings suggestive of axonal damage in addition to demyelination. GBS patients subsequent to C. jejuni  infection have been reported to frequently have axonal degeneration [8] . In patient 7, some other factor induced by the preceding C. jejuni  infection might also be elevated to cause axonal damage. Except for patient 7, all patients with the anti-LM1 IgG antibody exhibited good recovery, being classified Grade 1 within one month of the onset of neuropathy. The anti-LM1 IgG antibody might be a demyelinating factor, not being associated with axonal degeneration. Five of the seven GBS patients with an elevated anti-LM1 IgG antibody titer also had anti-GQ1b IgG antibody elevation. This percentage is significantly higher than that in the GBS patient group without the anti-LM1 IgG antibody. The anti-GQ1b IgG antibody is specifically and very frequently found in patients with MFS and GBS with ophthalmoplegia [12,13] . As ganglioside GQ1b is localized in the paranodal regions of the human cranial nerves innervating the extraocular muscles, it could be a causative factor of ophthalmoplegia in MFS and GBS [13] . Because the carbohydrate structure of LM1 is quite different from that of GQ1b (Table 2  ), coexistence of antibody activities against LM1 and GQ1b cannot be explained by cross-reactivity. Most of the patients with elevated titers of anti-GQ1b IgG antibody have the antecedent respiratory tract infections (Kusunoki et al., unpublished observation). The data in this study show that all five patients with both the anti-LM1 and anti-GQ1b IgG antibodies in the serum had a respiratory tract infection before the onset of neuropathy. This is in striking contrast to antibodies to GM1 and GalNAc-GD1a, which are elevated mainly subsequent to gastrointestinal tract infections [2,14] . Elevated titers of both anti-GQ1b and anti-LM1 antibodies may be associated with some unknown infectious agent(s) affecting the respiratory tract. Direct evidence that anti-LM1 antibodies cause demyelination has not yet been shown. Although the anti-LM1 antibody is present in only about 5% of GBS patients, it is still an important clue to understanding the pathogenetic mechanisms of demyelination in a subset of GBS cases. Further studies are needed to see whether it is actually a demyelinating factor or not.   Acknowledgments This work was supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture of Japan (10670576), and by a Research Grant for Neuroimmunological Diseases from the Ministry of Health and Welfare of Japan. We thank Ms R. Mashiko and Ms H. Mashiko for their technical assistance. We also thank Drs K. Ikeguchi, K. Fujiwara, Y. Yasukawa, K. Ohta, N. Shima and K. Arimura for providing us with the clinical information of the patients.   
