 Heterocyclic amines are potent bacterial mutagens [1] , rodent carcinogens [2] , and suspected human carcinogens [3] . Formation of heterocyclic amines during cooking processes (reviewed in Refs. [4, 5] ) suggests that exposure to these compounds is largely unavoidable [6] . Therefore, other means of controlling heterocyclic amine-induced cancer risk need to be considered. Numerous dietary components have been shown to substantially decrease the bacterial mutagenicity of heterocyclic amines, including chlorophyllin [7, 8] , extracts and isolated polyphenolic components from tea, coffee and other plant sources [8–14] , isothiocyanates [15] and 1-O -hexyl-2,3,5-trimethylhydroquinone [16] . Extract of madder root (Rubia tinctorum ) contains a number of hydroxyanthraquinones and has been used as a treatment for kidney and bladder stones [17] and as a food colouring. Purpurin (1,2,4-trihydroxy-9,10-anthraquinone) (Fig. 1  ) is present at trace amounts in R. tinctorum [18] and as a major anthraquinone component of R. akane , Japanese madder (communication from The San-Ei Gen Foundation for Food and Chemical Research, Osaka). Purpurin is non-mutagenic in the majority of Ames tester strains [18, 19] and is only weakly mutagenic in TA1537 [19] . We have investigated the possible protective role of this polyphenolic compound against bacterial mutagenesis induced by a number of food-derived heterocyclic amines, particularly 3-amino-1-methyl-5H -pyrido[4,3-b ]indole (Trp-P-2), in the Ames test using TA98. The metabolism of heterocyclic amines to mutagenic intermediates is catalyzed mainly by the cytochrome P 4501A (CYP1A) isoforms, in particular CYP1A2 (Ref. [20] and references therein). In extrahepatic tissues there is also some contribution to bioactivation by prostaglandin H synthase [21] . In addition, there is some evidence for a free radical mechanism involving NADPH-cytochrome P 450 reductase [22] . Previously, it has been reported that chlorophyllin [23] and several anti-mutagenic polyphenols [10, 13, 16] exert their effect, in vitro, by inhibition of CYP-dependent metabolism of heterocyclic amines to their active hydroxylamine metabolites. Therefore, in addition to the regular Ames tester strain (TA98), we investigated the anti-mutagenic potential of purpurin in bacteria expressing human drug metabolizing enzymes (human CYP1A2, human NADPH-cytochrome P 450 reductase, and Salmonella O -acetyltransferase).  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Chemicals Reagent grade purpurin (1,2,4-trihydroxy-9,10-anthraquinone) (86% pure, as determined by reversed-phase HPLC) and all heterocyclic amines were obtained from Wako (Osaka, Japan). Pure grade chlorophyllin (Cu–Na salt) was obtained from Nakalai Tesque (Kyoto, Japan) and epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) (95% pure) was a kind gift from Dr. I. Sakata (Toyo Hakka Satasho, Okayama). Activated  heterocyclic amines were prepared by incubation of the parent amine with rat hepatic S9 mix for 20 min at 37°C, protein precipitation with acetone and freeze drying of the supernatant as described previously [24] . Finally, purified Trp-P-2(NHOH) was synthesized from Trp-P-2 via Trp-P-2(NO2) as described by Saito et al. [25] .  2.2 Animals and treatment Induced S9 used in the assay systems was obtained from male rats pre-treated with PCB-54 (a commercial mixture of polychlorinated biphenyls, Tokyo Kasei Chemical) as described previously [26] .  2.3 Bacterial strains and mutation assays Bacterial strains TA98, and TA98-1,8-DNP6 , were kind gifts from Prof. B.N. Ames (University of California, Berkeley), and Prof. H. Rosenkranz (Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH), respectively. Strains TA1538R, TA1538AR and TA1538ARO, which express human drug metabolizing enzymes, were established as described by Suzuki et al. [27] . Mutagenicity assays were performed using the methods of Maron and Ames [28] with modifications for strains expressing recombinant human enzymes as described previously [27] . To demonstrate the anti-mutagenic activities of purpurin, the mutagenic heterocyclic amines were assayed with the use of the pre-incubation technique of Yahagi et al. [29] , with purpurin added before the pre-incubation. To investigate the mechanism of anti-mutagenesis, a two-stage test was performed, in which an initial incubation of TA1538ARO (a strain expressing human CYP1A2, human NADPH-cytochrome P 450 reductase, and bacterial O -acetyltransferase) bacterial culture (100 ml) with or without the addition of purpurin with shaking at 20°C. After 20 min, aliquots were taken and centrifuged to harvest the bacteria. The bacteria were washed twice by resuspending in nutrient broth followed by centrifugation. The final bacterial pellet was gently resuspended in nutrient broth and incorporated into the Ames test.  2.4 Measurement of CYP and NADPH-cytochrome P 450 reductase Total cytochrome P 450 content was measured by the method of Omura and Sato [30] and NADPH-cytochrome P 450 reductase activity was determined by the reduction of cytochrome c  according to the method of Phillips and Langdon [31] .   3 Results Fig. 2   demonstrates the anti-mutagenic potential of purpurin against heterocyclic amine-induced mutagenicity using Salmonella typhimurium  TA98. Purpurin was able to significantly inhibit the mutagenicity of each activated  heterocyclic amine in a dose-dependent manner. This inhibitory effect was most marked for Trp-P-1 (0.5 nmol) and Trp-P-2 (0.06 nmol) with greater than 90% inhibition (Fig. 2 ) but was also greater than 60% for MeIQ (0.2 nmol), IQ (0.1 nmol) and Glu-P-1 (5.0 nmol). The inhibition of Trp-P-2-dependent mutagenicity by purpurin and two other established anti-mutagens, EGCG and chlorophyllin clearly showed that purpurin is an effective inhibitor of mutagenicity (Fig. 3  ). Even when the molarities of the added compounds are taken into account, purpurin (17% inhibition per nmol added) is comparable to the other two anti-mutagens (EGCG, 16% per nmol and chlorophyllin, 13% per nmol). Inhibition of Trp-P-2(NHOH) mutagenicity was investigated at pH 5 and pH 7.4. At neutral pH the anti-mutagenic effect was considerably greater (94%) than at pH 5 (54%). However, the mutagenic response at pH 5 was only 25% of that observed at pH 7.4 (Table 1  ). TA98-1,8-DNP6  is a bacterial strain deficient in N ,O -acetyltransferase [32] . In aryl amines, O -acetylation is considered a bioactivation pathway and consequently, it is possible that purpurin exerts its anti-mutagenic effect by having an influence upon acetylation of the N -hydroxylamine. However, the mutagenic response of Trp-P-2(NHOH) in TA98-1,8-DNP6  and the parent TA98 strains were very similar (Table 2  ). The degree of inhibition by purpurin was the same in both strains (Table 2 ). In both the presence and absence of rat hepatic S9, purpurin did not affect the mutagenic response of Trp-P-2(NHOH) if the reaction mixtures were not pre-incubated. In contrast, if assay mixtures were pre-incubated for 40 min at 37°C, purpurin inhibited the mutagenic response in both the presence and absence of S9. Both the mutagenicity of Trp-P-2(NHOH) and the inhibition by purpurin were more marked in the absence of S9 mix (Fig. 4  ). Purpurin was non-mutagenic in Salmonella  strains TA1538R, TA1538AR and TA1538ARO which express human drug metabolizing enzymes (Table 3  ). Some cytotoxicity was observed in TA1538ARO (Table 3 ). A dose-dependent inhibition of the mutagenicity of Trp-P-2 was observed for purpurin in strain TA1538ARO with a 10-fold excess of purpurin almost entirely removing the mutagenic response (Fig. 5  ). During the two-stage mutagenicity test, a 20-min incubation of the TA1538ARO bacterial culture with purpurin resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of NADPH-cytochrome P 450 reductase and a dose-dependent degradation of CYP (Fig. 6  ). Consequently, when these bacteria were employed in the Ames test, the mutagenic response obtained with a range of Trp-P-2 concentrations also decreased dose-dependently (Fig. 7  ).  4 Discussion We have presented here the possible advantage of purpurin as an inhibitor of heterocyclic amine-induced mutations, using the Ames bacterial test system. Purpurin markedly inhibited the mutagenic response of a range of heterocyclic amines with an apparent preference for inhibition of the activated  pyrido indoles, Trp-P-1 and Trp-P-2 (Fig. 2 ). At a mutagen:purpurin ratio of only 1:4 a 90% inhibition of Trp-P-1 mutagenicity was observed (Fig. 2 ). When a purified sample of purpurin was used (purity 100%, a kind gift from The San-Ei Gen Foundation for Food Chemical Research, Osaka), identical results were obtained (data not shown). When the protective effect of purpurin against activated  Trp-P-2 was compared to that observed with the established anti-mutagens, EGCG and chlorophyllin, purpurin was found to be equally potent (Fig. 3 ). Solutions of purpurin at different pH values have markedly different physical appearances. At pH 5, a purpurin solution is orange while at neutral pH and alkaline conditions, solutions are purple. The inhibition of Trp-P-2(NHOH) mutagenicity was investigated at neutral (7.4) and acidic (5) pH (Table 1 ). At neutral pH, addition of a 30-fold excess of purpurin almost entirely inhibited the mutagenic response, but at pH 5 the decrease in revertant colonies was only 60% (Table 1 ). This infers that whatever change there may be in the structure of purpurin occurring in acidic solutions blocks the anti-mutagenic potential. However, at pH 5 the mutagenicity of Trp-P-2(NHOH) is also considerably decreased in the absence of purpurin (Table 1 ). This may be because Trp-P-2(NHOH) is considerably more stable under acidic conditions and consequently, does not degrade so readily to the nitrenium ion. Purpurin could act at neutral pH by increasing the rate of degradation of the hydroxylamine to a non-mutagenic intermediate. Degradation of Trp-P-2(NHOH) to less mutagenic intermediates has been observed previously in our laboratory for other natural pigments such as Monascus  red and Monascus  yellow [33] and chlorophyllin [34] . Many aromatic N -hydroxylamines undergo further metabolism by bacterial N ,O -acetyltransferases to more mutagenic N -acetoxyamines. To determine whether purpurin exerts its effect upon the N -hydroxylamine or the N -acetoxyamine, the inhibition of Trp-P-2(NHOH) mutagenicity was observed in TA98 and the N ,O -acetyltransferase-deficient TA98-1,8-DNP6  strains. Both the mutagenic response of Trp-P-2(NHOH) and its inhibition by purpurin were comparable in both strains (Table 2 ). The absence of any decrease in Trp-P-2(NHOH)-induced mutations in the N ,O -acetyltransferase-deficient strain is in agreement with previous investigations [35–37] . It has been suggested that this is because the N -hydroxylamine and the N -acetoxyamine of Trp-P-2 are equally capable of forming the nitrenium ion [37] . Consequently, these results demonstrate that purpurin can express a potent anti-mutagenic effect by interaction with the N -hydroxylamine. In both the presence and the absence of S9, purpurin had no effect on the mutagenicity of Trp-P-2(NHOH) if the direct plate-incorporation assay was employed, but purpurin acted as an anti-mutagen when using the pre-incubation method (Fig. 4 ). This observation implies that pre-incubation is essential for an inhibitory response but a simple dilution effect cannot be ruled out. In the presence of S9, the mutagenic response is considerably lower, probably as a consequence of non-specific binding of reactive intermediates to protein. Even in the absence of purpurin, pre-incubation is responsible for a decrease in revertants in both the presence and absence of S9. This is a consequence of the time-dependent degradation of Trp-P-2(NHOH) [38] under aerobic conditions. However, the presence of purpurin is responsible for a significant decrease in revertants in addition to the aerobic degradation (Fig. 4 ). The effect of purpurin was less marked in the presence of S9, suggesting that enzymes within the S9 may act either by metabolizing purpurin to a less effective inhibitor or by reversing any direct effect of purpurin on the mutagen. Several hydroxyanthraquinones, including purpurin, have been proposed as carcinogens and bacterial mutagens [18, 19, 39–44] . Chronic feeding of a high dose of purpurin (1% diet, 520 days) to rats was responsible for increased hyperplasia of the renal, pelvic epithelium and papilloma and carcinoma development in the urinary bladder [41] . These effects have been attributed to crystallization of purpurin [41] . However, unlike 1-hydroxyanthraquinone [40] , no tumorigenic or toxicological effects were observed in the intestines [41] . Therefore, lower doses, which may avoid crystallization in urinary tract, may not be tumorigenic. From the structure of purpurin, it is conceivable that it forms free radicals in the presence of NADPH-cytochrome P 450 reductase. Therefore, the mutagenicity of purpurin was investigated in bacterial strains expressing recombinant enzymes TA1538R (human NADPH-cytochrome P 450 reductase), TA1538AR (human NADPH-cytochrome P 450 reductase and human CYP1A2), and TA1438ARO (human NADPH-cytochrome P 450 reductase, human CYP1A2, and bacterial O -acetyltransferase) [27] . At the concentrations under investigation, no mutagenicity was detected in any of these strains (Table 3 ). Purpurin did display some cytotoxicity in TA1538R and, to a greater degree, in the TA1538ARO strain. The cytotoxicity in the TA1538ARO strain implies that O -acetylation of purpurin is responsible for the formation of a cytotoxic metabolite. However, the spontaneous reversion rate did not decrease when the concentration of purpurin was raised above 2500 pmol (Table 3 ) and did not decrease below that observed for the TA1538R and TA1538AR strains. An increase in the spontaneous reversion rate observed with bacterial strains expressing O -acetyltransferase has been reported previously [45] but the reason for it is unknown. When purpurin was present, the mutagenicity of Trp-P-2 was inhibited dose-dependently in the TA1538ARO strain, with the addition of 5 nmol purpurin responsible for the complete removal of mutagenic response (Fig. 5 ). Similarly, use of a two-stage test demonstrated that purpurin successfully enters the bacterial cell, causes a concentration-dependent degradation of CYP1A2 and inhibition of NADPH-cytochrome P 450 reductase (Fig. 6 ), and inhibited the bioactivation of Trp-P-2 (Fig. 7 ). The good correlation between Trp-P-2 (125 pmol) mutagenicity and CYP1A2 degradation (R 2 =0.822) and the excellent correlation between Trp-P-2 (125 pmol) mutagenicity and the inhibition of NADPH-cytochrome P 450 reductase (R 2 =0.981) demonstrates that purpurin acts by inhibiting the bioactivation of Trp-P-2 by CYP1A2. Whether purpurin truly degrades CYP1A2 or simply binds to the haemoprotein preventing quantification using the carbon monoxide-difference spectra was not determined. Certainly, the structure of purpurin is suggestive of a substrate for CYP1A isoforms. Consequently, purpurin may compete with Trp-P-2 for access to the active site of CYP1A1 and CYP1A2. To conclude, purpurin is a potent inhibitor of heterocyclic amine-induced bacterial mutagenesis especially that of activated  Trp-P-1 and Trp-P-2 (Fig. 2 ). This anti-mutagenic potential of purpurin is comparable to that of recognized anti-mutagens, EGCG and chlorophyllin. The mechanism of inhibition was partially characterized using activated  Trp-P-2 and was found to be dependent upon pH, being more effective under neutral than acidic conditions, and pre-incubation. The mechanism appears to constitute, at least in part, an inhibition of bioactivation by CYP1A2. The use of bacteria expressing human drug metabolizing enzymes demonstrated that these observations may have some relevance for anticarcinogenesis in humans. Purpurin also inhibits the direct mutagenicity of Trp-P-2(NHOH), implying that it has a second, so far unidentified, protective mechanism. These are only initial observations obtained using bacteria. Purpurin has been proposed as a possible rodent carcinogen in long-term feeding studies [41] . Consequently, in depth in vivo investigations in suitable animal models need to be performed before purpurin can be considered a true chemopreventive agent.   Acknowledgements The authors would like to express their thanks to The Japanese Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) for their generous stipend for one of them (T.M), to The Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture, Japan for funding the research through the Grant-in-Aid for JSPS Fellows (No. 97439) and to The San-Ei Gen Foundation for Food Chemical Research, Osaka, for their funding and gift of pure purpurin.   
