 Piroxicam (PXM) (Fig. 1  ), a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, is widely used in the therapy of osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis, and it has been known to induce photosensitivity as one of its side-effects [1] . The photosensitive eruption occurs within a few days after starting the treatment with this drug, suggesting a phototoxic reaction [2–4] . However, there are some reports that PXM-induced photosensitivity is mainly due to photoallergy [5–7] . Ampiroxicam (APX) is a prodrug of PXM and is developed to minimize gastric side-effects [8,9] . Inactive APX is hydrolyzed to active PXM by an intestinal esterase during absorption through the intestinal wall [10] . Hence, the mechanism of photosensitivity induced by both PXM and APX has been considered to be similar [11–13] . However, we have recently experienced a patient with photosensitivity induced by APX who showed positive patch testing to UVA-irradiated APX and thiosalicylate (TOS), but was negative to UVA-irradiated PXM. In order to elucidate the mechanism of APX- and PXM-induced photosensitivity further, antigenicity of UVA-irradiated APX and its cross-reactivity to APX and TOS, which is thought to be an active hapten of PXM, were examined using an in vivo model of contact hypersensitivity.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Animals Female Hartley strain guinea pigs (380–450 g weight) were purchased from Saitama Experimental Animals Supply (Saitama, Japan).  2.2 Reagents and chemicals APX and PXM were kindly provided by Toyama Chemical (Tokyo, Japan). TOS and Freund’s complete adjuvant were obtained from Wako Pure Chemical (Osaka, Japan). Other chemicals were of the highest grade commercially available.  2.3 Absorption spectra APX (0.01%) and TOS (0.01%) were dissolved in acetone and phosphate buffer (pH 7.4), respectively. Furthermore, the solutions of APX UVA-irradiated or non-irradiated (10 J/cm2 ) were taken to dryness under a stream of nitrogen, and the residues were reconstituted with phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). Absorption spectra of these compounds were measured using an automatic spectrophotometer (U-2000; Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan).  2.4 UVA irradiation procedure Black light tubes (FL40S BLB; Toshiba, Tokyo, Japan) were set 15 cm distance from each solution. The light passed through 3-mm thick glass. In vitro irradiation was carried out at 12.5–25.5 J/cm2  of UVA in a glass tube at room temperature. The irradiation dose was measured with a UV radiometer (UVR305/365DII; Toshiba).  2.5 Sensitization Antigenecity of APX and PXM were evaluated by the adjuvant patch test method, i.e. a modified maximization test for detection of contact hypersensitivity allergens in guinea pig [14] . Each animal was sensitized with UVA (12.5 J/cm2 )-irradiated 1% APX in acetone/olive oil (A/O) (1: 4), 1% PXM in A/O, 1% TOS in ethanol, or control vehicle. At the first induction, 100 μl of each chemical was applied with a patch tested occlusively on a shaved and abraded nuchal skin area (3×4 cm2 ), which was defined by intradermal injections (0.1ml×4) of emulsified Freund’s complete adjuvant at the corners. The patch tests were repeated daily for 3 days. At the second induction, 10% sodium laulyl sulfate in petrolatum was applied topically on the eighth day, and each sample was patch tested occlusively again on the ninth day.  2.6 Elicitation and evaluation All solutions were prepared at 1% concentration by mixing with A/O. Animals were tested on day 21 by applying 20 μl of the solution, which was open application on the shaved skin of the flank. Reading was scored 48 h later according to the following scale for scoring skin reactions. (A) Scale for erythema: 0, no erythema; 1, very slight erythema (barely perceptible); 2, well-defined erythema; 3, moderate to severe erythema; 4, severe erythema. (B) Scale for edema: 0, no edema; 1, slight edema; 2, moderate edema; 3, severe edema (raised more than 1 mm and extending beyond the area of exposure). The (A) and (B) score were totalled. A total score greater than 2 was expressed as positive, according to the criteria of the International Contact Dermatitis Research Group (ICDRG) [15] .  2.7 High-performance liquid chromatography condition and apparatus High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis was performed on a capcell pak column (250 mm, i.d. 4.6 cm, particle size 5 μm) type SG120 (Shiseido, Tokyo, Japan), using a solvent mixture (methanol:acetonitrile:distilled water=2:3:5, v/v) as the mobile phase at a flow-rate of 0.7 ml/min. The apparatus (TOSOH, Tokyo, Japan) used for this work consisted of HPLC pump (CCPD) and a UV monitor (UV8020) set at a wavelength of 250 nm. The sample was introduced through a fixed 20 μl loop injector (AS-8000) and the peak area was measured on an integrator (chromatocorder 21). The UVA-irradiated APX and PXM were prepared in acetone. The solutions were evaporated to dryness and then reconstituted in the mobile phase.   3 Results 3.1 In vivo study As shown in  Tables 1 and 2  , contact hypersensitivities among UVA-irradiated APX, UVA-irradiated PXM and TOS were examined. Animals sensitized with UVA-irradiated 1% APX showed positive patch testing to UVA-irradiated APX and TOS, while they were negative in challenge by UVA-irradiated PXM, APX and PXM. None of the UVA-irradiated or non-irradiated APX and PXM showed positive patch testing in animals sensitized with either UVA-irradiated PXM or control vehicles (Table 1 ). Animals immunized with TOS were successfully challenged by TOS and cross-reacted to UVA-irradiated APX; however, they failed to react to UVA-irradiated PXM, APX and PXM (Table 2 ).  3.2 In vitro study The absorption spectra of APX, TOS and UVA-irradiated APX are shown in Fig. 2  . The maximal absorption of APX was 320 nm, and alternation of the absorbance spectrum was detected after irradiation. The absorption peak shifted to shorter wavelength. The UVA-irradiated APX spectrum resembles that of TOS. The maximal absorbance of the PXM was 360 nm (data not shown). Solutions irradiated with UVA were submitted to HPLC for the quantification of undegradated compounds. Concentration of APX was easily reduced by the increase in UVA irradiation doses, as compared with that of PXM. Finally, APX almost disappeared at the UVA irradiation dose of 12.5 J/cm2  (Fig. 3  ).   4 Discussion In the present study, we succeeded in the development of a novel animal model reflecting clinical observations that a patient with photosensitivity induced by APX showed positive patch testing to UVA-irradiated APX and TOS, but negative for UVA-irradiated PXM. The animals sensitized with UVA-irradiated APX might be a useful model to examine the common antigenic properties of drugs that develop photosensitivity. Furthermore, our results suggest that contact hypersensitivity induced by UVA-irradiated APX could be developed by photoproducts of APX itself, but not by the biotransformation of APX to PXM. Actually, it is better that sensitized animals are challenged with systemic administration of APX and following UVA irradiation to skin for evaluating the clinical phenomena. However, we have a final plan to detect the antigenic photoproducts of APX in a future study. Hence, UVA irradiation was performed in vitro in the present experiments. It has been reported that several kinds of photoproducts of PXM are formed by UVA irradiation in different conditions [4,16] . Ikezawa et al. have reported that, in the animals sensitized with TOS, patch testing is positive to PXM under the condition that UVA is irradiated after a patch of PXM to the skin, suggesting that the presence of carrier protein would be necessary to become an active hapten possessing antigenic property, as irradiated UVA in the case of PXM differed from that of APX [17] . Furthermore, they have also shown that patch testing was negative to UVA-irradiated PXM without patch to the skin in the animals sensitized with TOS in agreement with our result. Indeed, we directly confirmed that PXM was not affected with UVA irradiation under conditions used in this study. As one of reasons for this result, it is thought that the intensity of UVA exposure used here is relatively low judging from other reports [16,17] . On the other hand, APX was easily decomposed by the same treatment with UVA, indicating the difference of character between APX and PXM. Interestingly, absorption spectrum of UVA-irradiated APX was similar to that of TOS. This result suggests that a part of photoproducts of APX might have common chemical structure of TOS. In facts, TOS showed positive reaction in the animals sensitized with UVA-irradiated APX, and vice versa, i.e. cross-reactivity was developed between UVA-irradiated APX and TOS. Further experiments regarding the detection of photoproducts of APX should be the next subject. Kurumaji [11]  has shown that the positive photo-patch testing is due to biotransformation of APX to PXM in the skin. However, taking the results in this study into consideration, the possibility of the biotransformation of APX to PXM in contact hypersensitivity reactions is quite low. Taken together, it appears that photoproducts of UVA-irradiated APX actually contain cross-reactive substances to itself or TOS, and that contact sensitivity reaction induced by APX may be due to photoproducts of this compound, but not that of PXM. In conclusion, we established an animal model reflecting clinical observation in a patient with APX-induced photosensitivity. The data shown here suggest that photoproducts of APX possess an antigenic property. In addition, patch of APX to the skin before UVA irradiation is not necessary to obtain the antigenic photoproducts of APX in this method, indicating that it is easy to recover and examine the antigenic substances of APX. Therefore, the detection of products induced by irradiation of UVA to APX might assist the elucidation of the mechanism for photoallergy with PXM.    
