 Gangliosides are distributed mainly on the outer surface of cell membranes and play important roles in various cellular functions including adhesion, growth, differentiation, and signal transduction [1–3] . C-series gangliosides are characterized by the presence of a trisialosyl residue at the inner galactose of the hemato- or ganglio-oligosaccharide structure [4] . This ganglioside species is present in adult fish brain of certain species in high concentrations [5] . In avian and mammalian brain, though c-series gangliosides and their O -acetyl derivatives are temporarily expressed at embryonic stages, they are hardly detected at adult ages [6–9] . Evidence has been provided suggesting that they may be involved in growth, differentiation and migration of neuronal cells [10–12] . C-series gangliosides have also been detected in tissues and cells of extra-neural origin, including swine kidney [13] , human lung [14] , bovine buttermilk [15] , cat erythrocytes [16] , pancreatic islet cells [17] , and different types of cancer cells [18–20] . Expression of c-series gangliosides may be cell-specific. Our recent study suggested their specific localization in pancreatic B cells among islet and non-islet cells of rat pancreatic tissue [21] . Information, however, is still limited about the distribution and function of c-series gangliosides in extra-neural tissues and cell types. Iber et al. [22]  investigated sialyltransferase activities in Golgi preparations from rat liver and reported that c-series gangliosides are formed by the same set of glycosyltransferases catalyzing the biosynthesis of asialo-, a- and b-series gangliosides. This finding led to an assumption that c-series gangliosides are expressed in hepatocytes and carry a function(s) in the cells. In the present study, we examined c-series gangliosides in rat hepatocytes in primary culture and liver tissues from rats of various ages using a specific monoclonal antibody, A2B5.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Materials Male Sprague-Dawley rats were purchased from a commercial breeder. An A2B5-producing hybridoma CRL 1520 was obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, USA) and cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Sigma). Culture medium containing the monoclonal antibody A2B5 (IgM-type) was used for this study. Another monoclonal antibody, D1.1 (IgG3-type), which specifically recognizes 9-O -acetyl GD3, was a kind gift of Dr. Robert K. Yu (Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA). An antibody against GM1 or asialo-GM1 (IgG-type for both) was prepared by immunizing rabbits with purified glycolipid by a method reported previously [23] . Other chemicals were purchased from the following companies: epidermal growth factor (EGF), fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)- or peroxidase-conjugated antibodies against mouse IgM or rabbit IgG, and Arthrobacter ureafaciens  sialidase (Sigma), Block-Ace (blocking solution, Dainihon-Seiyaku Co., Japan), enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) Western blotting detection kit (Amersham), cell proliferation MTT and ELISA bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) kits (Boehringer-Mannheim), thin-layer chromatographic (TLC) plates (nanoplates, E. Merck), and purified GD3 and bovine brain ganglioside mixture (Matreya, USA).  2.2 Primary culture of rat hepatocytes Hepatocytes were isolated from 7-week-old rat liver using a perfusion method reported by Seglen [24] . The purity of isolated parenchymal hepatocytes was judged to be more than 98% under microscopy. The isolated cells were suspended in L-15 medium, seeded in collagen-coated culture dishes, and incubated at 37°C for 24 h under 1% CO2 -99% air. After replacing the medium with media containing 10% FBS, 10 μg/ml of insulin, 10 μM dexamethasone, and 20 ng/ml of EGF, the cells were cultured for 5 days (day 0 to day 5). Practically no growth of non-parenchymal cells was observed throughout culture. For assessment of hepatocyte proliferation rates, either the MTT or the BrdU incorporation assay could be used, providing comparable proliferation curves (data not shown). An MTT assay was used in the present study.  2.3 Immunofluorescence of cultured hepatocytes Primary cultures of rat hepatocytes on day 5 were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, followed by incubation with a blocking solution (Block-Ace) at 37°C for 1.5 h. The fixed cells were incubated consecutively with an anti-ganglioside antibody and FITC-conjugated second antibody at 37°C for 1.5 h, followed by examination under fluorescence microscopy. For control, the primary antibody was replaced by diluted culture medium (for A2B5 or D1.1) or preimmune serum (for anti-GM1 antibody).  2.4 Isolation of gangliosides Total lipids were extracted from cultured cells or liver tissues with chloroform/methanol (1:1) and separated into neutral and acidic lipids by DEAE-Sephadex column chromatography. Acidic lipids were treated with methanolic 0.2 M NaOH at 37°C for 1 h, followed by neutralization with acetic acid. Purified gangliosides were obtained by desalting the neutralized sample by Sephadex LH-20 column chromatography. Chicken brain gangliosides were purified from 13-day-old embryos by a similar method.  2.5 TLC immunostaining of gangliosides TLC immunostaining was carried out based upon a method reported previously [25] . Gangliosides were developed on a TLC plate with a solvent system of chloroform/methanol/0.2% CaCl2 ·2H2 O (45:40:10). After coating with a 0.4% polyisobutylmethacrylate solution, the plate was overlaid consecutively with an anti-ganglioside antibody and peroxidase-conjugated second antibody at room temperature for 1.5 h. The responsive band(s) were detected on X-ray film by an ECL Western blotting detection kit. Gangliosides on the plate were visualized with resorcinol-HCl reagent [26] .  2.6 Detection of gangliosides having a gangliotetraose oligosaccharide structure Core structures of oligosaccharides of gangliosides were analyzed using TLC immunostaining with in situ hydrolysis of gangliosides by sialidase [27] . In brief, gangliosides were developed on TLC and treated in situ with A. ureafaciens  sialidase (100 mU/ml, pH 4.8) at room temperature for 1.5 h. Asialo-GM1, which was generated from gangliotetraose ganglioside species, was detected by TLC immunostaining with an anti-asialo-GM1 antibody. The antibody used was shown to have strict specificity for asialo-GM1 with no cross-reactivity with any bovine brain gangliosides [27] .   3 Results 3.1 Detection of c-series gangliosides in rat hepatocytes in culture The specificity of the antibody preparation used in this study was examined first by TLC immunostaining with ganglioside preparations from embryonic chicken brain and bovine brain; the former is known to express c-series gangliosides at higher concentrations [7,9] . As shown in Fig. 1A  , the antibody did not react with a- and b-series gangliosides in bovine brain gangliosides (lane 2), but selectively immunostained three ganglioside species among chicken brain gangliosides (lane 1). Based upon their mobilities on TLC, these gangliosides were assigned to GT3, GQ1c, and GP1c [5] . Using this A2B5 preparation and other anti-ganglioside antibodies, primary cultures of adult rat hepatocytes on day 5 were examined by an immunofluorescence method. Rat hepatocytes were stained positively with A2B5 (Fig. 2  ). The cells were also immunostained with an anti-GM1 antibody, but hardly stained with D1.1, which is specific for 9-O -acetyl GD3. To confirm the presence of c-series gangliosides in rat hepatocytes, gangliosides were isolated from cells and examined for their reactivity to A2B5. Five positive bands (i.e., bands a, b, c, d, and X) were observed with TLC immunostaining with A2B5 (Fig. 1B , lane 1). Of these acidic lipid bands, bands a, b, c, and d had chromatographic mobilities that corresponded respectively to GT3, GT1c, GQ1c, and GP1c [5] . Gangliosides of rat hepatocytes were further characterized using TLC immunostaining with in situ treatment by sialidase. Gangliosides having the gangliotetraose (i.e., GgOse4 ) structure can be detected by this method [27] . As shown in Fig. 3  , GM1, GD1a, GD1b, GT1b, and GQ1b, but not GD3, were stained positively, confirming the validity of this method. In addition, three minor gangliosides with a gangliotetraose backbone were detected below GT1b, below GQ1b, and far below GQ1b on TLC; their mobilities were identical to A2B5-positive bands b, c, and d, respectively. The anti-asialo-GM1 antibody did not stain any hepatocyte gangliosides without in situ sialidase treatment (data not shown). Based upon these findings, A2B5-reactive bands a, b, c, and d were respectively identified as GT3, GT1c, GQ1c, and GP1c. In addition to these c-series gangliosides, an acidic lipid (band X), which migrated between GD3 and GD1a on TLC, was observed on TLC immunostaining with A2B5. Since the ganglioside preparation had already been subjected to base treatment during isolation, it is unlikely that band X is alkali-labile O -acetyl GT3, which migrates near GD3 [28] . The possibility that band X is GD3 was also ruled out by the lack of reactivity of A2B5 to authentic GD3 (data not shown). While band X remained positive on TLC immunostaining by further treatment of the ganglioside preparation with a mild base (0.2 M methanolic NaOH, 37°C for 1 h), it was not detected when the lipid was purified by preparative TLC and subjected to the same treatment (data not shown). It thus was suggested that band X may be a non-ganglioside acidic lipid.  3.2 Effects of EGF on the expression of c-series gangliosides The effects of EGF on the expression of c-series gangliosides in cultured hepatocytes were examined. In the presence of EGF, hepatocytes proliferated actively up to day 3 and ceased proliferation (Fig. 4A  ). While the total amount of c-series gangliosides increased throughout the period of culture, individual ganglioside species showed different time-course profiles (Fig. 5A  ). The content of GT3 rapidly increased up to day 3 and reached a plateau, showing a profile similar to the growth pattern of the cells. The concentrations of polysialo species such as GT1c, GQ1c, and GP1c exhibited only moderate changes during the period of active proliferation (i.e., up to day 1), but rapidly increased as the cells became confluent. When EGF was removed from the culture medium, rat hepatocytes proliferated only on the first day of culture (Fig. 4A ). While the expression of GT3 was reduced significantly, the amounts of polysialo species at day 5 were almost the same as observed with EGF (Fig. 5B ).  3.3 Effects of cell density on the expression of c-series gangliosides Expression of c-series gangliosides in rat hepatocytes was also modulated by cell density in culture. Growth rates decreased as cells were cultured at higher density (Fig. 4B ). While the expression of GT3 was less influenced by changes in cell density, the contents of polysialo species such as GT1c, GQ1c, and GP1c significantly increased at higher cell density (Fig. 6  ).  3.4 Developmental changes in the composition of c-series gangliosides in liver tissues C-series gangliosides in liver tissues were examined using rats of ages ranging from 16 embryonic days (E16) to 7 postnatal weeks. As shown in Fig. 7  , the composition of c-series gangliosides demonstrated a unique developmental pattern. While GT3 were the major species at E16, they were replaced by GQ1c at E19. In the postnatal period, polysialo gangliosides including GP1c became dominant with advancing age. In addition, another positive band (band Y), which migrated above GM3 on TLC, was observed in the adult stage. Band Y became negative on TLC immunostaining after further treatment of the ganglioside preparation with a mild base, suggesting that this band is not a c-series ganglioside or derivative (data not shown).   4 Discussion In the present study, we employed monoclonal antibody A2B5 for analyzing c-series gangliosides in rat hepatocytes and liver tissues. Since c-series gangliosides exist as minor ganglioside components in mammalian tissues, they are difficult to analyze by conventional visualization methods after separation on TLC. Accordingly, specific antibodies for c-series gangliosides have been developed and used as valuable analytical tools [6,7,29,30] . Monoclonal antibody A2B5 was originally prepared by immunizing chicken embryonic retinal cells [29] . While there was some controversy about its specificity [31] , recent studies have reported strict specificity of A2B5 to c-series gangliosides using embryonic chicken brain [9]  and cod fish brain [32] . The present study has provided further evidence for the validity of this monoclonal antibody’s specificity. Five positive bands were observed on TLC immunostaining of hepatocyte gangliosides with A2B5. Among these bands, band X seemed unaffected by mild base treatment of ganglioside preparations, but became susceptible to the same treatment after purification by preparative TLC. Band Y was also shown to be alkali-labile. These results strongly suggest that bands X and Y are non-ganglioside acidic lipids. Gangliosides of hepatocytes and liver tissues are considerably low in their contents and need to be concentrated extensively before analysis. These non-ganglioside lipids may also be concentrated concomitantly and stained non-specifically on TLC immunostaining. Regarding bands a, b, c, and d, evidence has been provided suggesting that they belong to c-series gangliosides. They exhibited chromatographic mobilities corresponding to GT3, GT1c, GQ1c, or GP1c, respectively. Structural analysis of core oligosaccharides provided evidence suggesting that bands b, c, and d share the gangliotetraose oligosaccharide backbone. From these data, it was concluded that bands a, b, c, and d were GT3, GT1c, GQ1c, and GP1c, respectively. The presence of c-series gangliosides in rat hepatocytes was further supported by positive immunofluorescence of cultured cells with this A2B5 preparation. To our knowledge, this is the first report that rat hepatocytes express c-series gangliosides. TLC immunostaining of rat hepatocyte gangliosides with A2B5 demonstrated that the content and composition of c-series gangliosides in cells were influenced by EGF or cell density in culture. Since there was no recognizable growth of non-parenchymal cells, it was concluded that hepatocytes were responsible for the observed ganglioside changes. It is known that EGF can modulate the expression of major gangliosides in different cell types [33–36] . Treatment of rat hepatocytes with EGF produced a significant increase in the total amount of c-series gangliosides. Enhanced expression of c-series gangliosides by EGF has also been reported with cerebellar neuronal cells [37]  and neoplastic glial cells [38] . Interestingly, the effect of EGF on the expression of c-series gangliosides was differential; it caused significant increases in the amount of GT3, but affected the contents of polysialo species only moderately. Since the amount of GT3 and growth rate of cells display similar time courses, one can question the possibility that the increased expression of GT3 may reflect the growth activity of rat hepatocytes in culture. This assumption, however, is not supported; no correlation was observed between the content of GT3 and growth activity of cells when cells were cultured at different cell densities. We have recently examined the effects of EGF on the composition of major gangliosides in rat hepatocytes in primary cultures and demonstrated that EGF causes augmented expression of GM3 and GD3, but has a lesser effect on other ganglioside species including GM1, GD1a, GD1b, and GT1b [36] . As described in Section 1 , the sialylation processes of a-, b-, and c-series gangliosides are catalyzed by the same set of sialyltransferases [22] . Based upon these results about major gangliosides in cultured hepatocytes and the present work, it is assumed that EGF may accelerate the steps from lactosylceramide to GM3, from GM3 to GD3, and from GD3 to GT3, but have less influence on the further steps for the biosynthesis of gangliosides in rat hepatocytes (see Fig. 8  ). Thus the expression of GT3 may be connected to a specific process(es) governed by EGF. In this context, it is noteworthy that GT3 are expressed in liver tissues only in the early embryonic stage, in which EGF may function as a dominant growth factor for hepatocytes [39] . Expression of polysialo species was less affected by EGF, but was significantly enhanced by higher cell density. This finding appears to be in harmony with previous reports that the proportion of polysialo species among major gangliosides in some cell types increases as cells become confluent [36,40–44] . Analysis of c-series gangliosides in rat liver tissues demonstrated a unique developmental profile with a switch from a GT3-dominant composition to polysialo species-dominant patterns at late embryonic stages. Such a swift and complete switch in the composition (and metabolism) of c-series gangliosides has not been observed with embryonic neural tissues including chicken optic lobes [7]  or rat cerebral cortex [8] . While these neural tissues contain many different cell types, liver tissues are more homogeneous, largely consisting of parenchymal hepatocytes. The changes in the expression of c-series gangliosides in this period may closely reflect underlying cellular events within rat hepatocytes. In summary, we have demonstrated that rat hepatocytes express c-series gangliosides in a growth- and development-dependent manner. The results of in vivo and in vitro studies suggest that the GT3 and polysialo species may have a distinct role(s) in cellular function of rat hepatocytes. A further study on the regulatory mechanism for the expression of c-series gangliosides is being undertaken.   Acknowledgements We would like to thank Mr. Harunari Tanaka and Ms. Hisayo Kitamura for their technical assistance throughout this work.   
