   There are currently several potent fungal inhibitors of serine palmitoyl-   transferase (3-ketosphinganine synthase) [palmitoyl-CoA: L-serine C-pal-   mitoyltransferase (decarboxylating); EC 2.31.50], the first enzyme in the   de novo biosynthesis of ceramides and more complex sphingolipids. 1'2 In   t A. H. Merrill, Jr. and E. Wang, Methods Enzymol. 51, 427 (1992).   2 R. C. Dickson, R. L. Lester, and M. Marek, Methods Enzymol. 311 [1] 1999 (this volume).   Copyright © 1999 by Academic Press   All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.   0076-6879/99 $30.00 METHODS IN ENZYMOLOGY, VOL. 311  is measured when   casamino acids are omitted from the sphingolipid inhibition assay and the   comparatively poor activity that australifungin demonstrates in medium   that contains serum or peptone. In addition to the loss in potency, caution   is also advised when using australifungin in assays that employ trace   amounts of sphingoid bases; high concentrations of australifungin can result   in nonspecific inhibition due to sequestration of the sphingoid base.   Serine Palmitolytransferase Inhibitors   Viridiofungins are at least five-fold less potent and are not as specific   for serine palmitoyltransferase inhibition as the sphingofungin/myriocin   class of compounds. Viridiofungins are known to inhibit squalene synthase,   geranyl geranyltransferase, and other enzymes that are sensitive to di- and   tricarboxylic acids, albeit at higher concentrations than required for serine   palmitoyltransferase inhibition. Because of this difference in enzyme sensi-   tivity, viridiofungin A showed selective inhibition of sphingolipid synthesis   in labeling studies in C. albicans, with no evidence for inhibition of sterol   synthesis at growth inhibitory concentrations of drug. 7'22 For unknown   reasons, viridiofungins lack in vitro activity against Saccharomyces serine   palmitoyltransferase and do not inhibit sphingolipid synthesis in this yeast,   although they do inhibit the mammalian enzyme and appear to be selective   for sphingolipid inhibition in HepG2 cells.   2t~ A. H. Merrill, Jr., D. C. Liotta, and R. T. Riley, Trends Cell Biol. 6, 218 (1996).   3o R. T. Riley et al., J. Food Protect. 57, 638 (1994). INHIBITORS OF SPHINGOLIPID BIOSYNTHESIS 348 [36]   Inositol Phosphoceramide Synthase Inhibitors   Unlike inhibitors to earlier steps in sphingolipid synthesis, khafrefungin   and rustmicin do not have any detectable effect on lipid synthesis in mam-   malian cells (unpublished data and Ref. 13), and rustmicin and aureobasidin   A have been nontoxic in animal studies, a4'31 supporting the idea that inositol   phosphoceramide synthase is a fungal selective target. Khafrefungin was   lytic to washed red blood cells at 12.5 to 25/xg/ml. However, this toxicity   may be due to the detergent-like properties of the compound. Although   all three inositol phosphoceramide synthase inhibitors are very potent in   vitro (picomolar to low nanomolar), substantially higher concentrations are   required to kill fungi. In the case of rustmicin, two factors that limit whole   cell activity were identified: efflux via multidrug transporters and chemical   instability. TM Even at its optimal pH of 5.5, rustmicin degrades relatively   rapidly in aqueous media. Despite these limitations, concentrations of rust-   micin that are required to completely inhibit phosphosphingolipid synthesis   and accumulate ceramide in fungi are achieved easily.   Acknowledgments   We thank M. Zweerink and  BS:MIE 00110948 S0076-6879(00)11094-8 10.1016/S0076-6879(00)11094-8  Section II. inhibitors of sphingolipid biosynthesis    [35] Isolation and characterization of novel inhibitors of sphingolipid synthesis: Australifungin, viridiofungins, rustmicin, and khafrefungin Suzanne M. Mandala  Guy H. Harris   Publisher Summary Sphingolipid synthesis is an essential process in yeast and the pathogenic fungi that cause life-threatening human infections such as candidiasis, aspergillosis, and cryptococcosis. Although many steps in the human and fungal sphingolipid biosynthetic pathway are similar, there are several enzymes found uniquely in fungi that are potential targets for the development of nontoxic therapeutic antifungals. In the screening program, it has been found that natural products are a rich source of structurally diverse inhibitors of sphingolipid synthesis. Natural product inhibitors to four different enzymes that affect sphingolipid synthesis have been discovered: sphingofungins, lipoxamycin, myriocin/ISP1, and viridiofungins inhibit serine palmitoyltransferase; fumonisin B1 and australifungin, inhibit ceramide synthase; aureobasidins, khafrefungin, and rustmicin inhibit inositol phosphoceramide synthase; and minimoidin inhibits the fatty acid elongation pathway. Most of these compounds have fungicidal activity against a broad spectrum of pathogenic fungi, but only the inhibitors of inositol phosphoceramide are fungal selective; compounds that inhibit early biosynthetic steps show comparable activity against orthologous mammalian enzymes. This chapter describes a method to identify sphingolipid inhibitors and detailed protocol for the isolation of australifungin. More abbreviated descriptions of the isolation of viridiofungins, khafrefungin, and rustmicin are also included.    
