 T cell activation, which plays a central role in the regulation of both normal and pathogenic immune responses, involves multiple intracellular signaling events emanating from the cell surface TCR/CD3 complex and costimulatory molecules (Cantrell, 1996 ; Alberola-Ila et al., 1997 ). These signaling events can be largely mimicked by artificial stimulation of the T cells, such as combined treatment with anti-CD3 mAb and the PKC activator, PMA (Cantrell, 1996 ; Alberola-Ila et al., 1997 ). It has been shown that under both physiological and artificial conditions of stimulation, at least three signal transduction pathways, dependent respectively on the activation of calcineurin (O'Keefe et al., 1992 ), of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and its upstream regulator MEK1 (Seger and Krebs, 1995 ), and of the c-Jun-N terminal kinase (JNK) (Su et al., 1994 ) ultimately integrate (Cantrell, 1996 ; Alberola-Ila et al., 1997 ), leading to the secretion of cytokines and the acquisition of effector functions by the T cells. In particular, these pathways are essential for the production of IL-2 (O'Keefe et al., 1992 ; Li et al., 1996 ; Dumont et al., 1998 ; Powell et al., 1998 ; Werlen et al., 1998 ), the major T cell growth factor that is required for driving T cells into the proliferation cycle. Because of its pivotal immunoregulatory function, T cell activation provides a target for pharmacologic modulation aimed at achieving clinically useful immunosuppression. This is well demonstrated by the therapeutic efficacy of cyclosporin A (CsA) and FK506 (reviewed in Dumont, 1996 ), which selectively block calcineurin-dependent signaling (O'Keefe et al., 1992 ), and represent the mainstays of the immunosuppressive regimen currently available for the management of graft rejection and autoimmune diseases. However, these agents are less than perfect as their use is often associated with significant and limiting side-effects (Dumont, 1996 ), and there is a pressing need for novel inhibitors of T cell activation in order to expand the immunosuppressive therapeutic armamentareum. Intense screening effort of natural product or synthetic compounds are therefore ongoing to identify such inhibitors. This search led us to discover that hypothemycin, a resorcylic acid lactone natural product, previously described as an antibiotic (Nair and Carey, 1980 ; Nair et al., 1981 ; Agatsuma et al., 1993 ), exerts potent suppressive activity on T cell activation. The present studies characterized the effect of hypothemycin on several parameters of mouse and human T cell activation in vitro. We showed that this compound inhibits the proliferation of T cells induced by anti-CD3 mAb treatment and PMA in a manner partially reversed by exogenous IL-2. Moreover, hypothemycin was found to inhibit the production of IL-2, IL-6, IL-10, IFN-γ and TNF-α while enhancing the production of IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13, both at the mRNA and protein secretion levels. Further analyses suggested that hypothemycin disrupts calcineurin-independent signaling, through an inhibition of the ERK pathway. This compound therefore represents a novel type of T cell inhibitor with a mode of action distinct from that of CsA or FK506.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Isolation of hypothemycin Hypothemycin was isolated from fermentations of an unidentified fungal culture that was found active in a screen for inhibitors of T cell activation. The dried 2-butanone extract of the fermentation was purified by silica gel column chromatography developed with a step gradient of methanol in dichloromethane. The fractions containing hypothemycin were pooled and dried. Pure (>98%) hypothemycin was obtained by crystallization of this material from a mixture of acetone and hexanes. The compound was identified based on comparison of spectroscopic data (mass spectrometry, UV absorption, and nuclear magnetic resonance) to those previously published for hypothemycin (Nair and Carey, 1980 ; Nair et al., 1981 ; Agatsuma et al., 1993 ). Hypothemycin was dissolved at 10 mg/ml in DMSO and stored in aliquots at −70°C.  2.2 Other reagents Zearalenone (Kuiper-Goodman et al., 1987 ) was purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO) and stored in aliquots (10 mg/ml, DMSO) at −70°C. PD98059 (Dudley et al., 1995 ) was obtained from Biomol (Plymouth Meeting, PA). PMA, ionomycin and anisomycin were obtained from Sigma. Anti-mouse CD3 mAb (2C11) and anti-human CD3 mAb (1XE) were obtained from Pharmingen (San Diego, CA) and Research Diagnostics (Flanders, NJ), respectively. Human recombinant IL-2 was purchased from Biosource International (Camarillo, CA). Human PHA-conditioned media (T-stim, without PHA) was obtained from Fisher Scientific (Springfield, NJ). Fluoresceinated mAb to mouse CD69 was obtained from Pharmingen. Unconjugated and biotin-conjugated, matched anti-cytokine antibody pairs for quantitation of human cytokines by ELISA were obtained from Genzyme (Cambridge, MA) (IL-2), Research Diagnostics (IL-4, IL-13), or Pharmingen (IL-5, IL-10, IFN-γ, TNF-α). Poly-HRP-streptavidin was obtained from Research Diagnostics. Polyclonal antibodies to ERK1/2 and phosphospecific antibodies recognizing the catalytically activated forms of ERK1/2 (phosphorylation at Thr202/Tyr204) were obtained from New England Biolabs (Beverly, MA).  2.3 Cell isolation Mouse splenic T cells were isolated from C57Bl/6Tac mice by nylon wool separation. Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were separated from venous whole or leukophoresed blood from healthy volunteers (New York Blood Bank or University of Pennsylvania Medical Center) by ficoll/hypaque centrifugation (LSM, Organon Teknika). Highly purified T cells (93–96% CD3+ ) were isolated by E-rosetting of PBMC with neuraminidase-treated sheep red blood cells followed by overnight incubation at 37°C in plastic flasks to remove contaminating adherent cells. Mouse or human cells were washed and resuspended in complete culture medium made of RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum, 2 mM glutamine, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 2×10−5  M 2-mercaptoethanol and 20 ng/ml gentamycin.  2.4 Cell cultures Cell cultures were set up in flat-bottom 96-well plates; each well receiving 200 μl of cell suspension. Purified mouse or human T cells were seeded at a concentration of 5×105  cells/ml and PBMC at a concentration of 106  cells/ml. For stimulation of T cells, the appropriate anti-CD3 mAb (2C11: 100 ng/ml; 1X2: 0.4 μg/ml) was added with PMA (0.1, 1 or 10 ng/ml, as indicated) and with or without IL-2 (50 U/ml). For stimulation of human PBMC, the 1X2 mAb was used at 0.4 μg/ml and cultures were set up without or with 10% T-stim media. CTTL-2 cells (American Type Culture Collection, Rockville, MD) were washed extensively and incubated for 3 h at 37°C in the absence of IL-2, washed again and resuspended at 104  cells/ml in culture medium containing 100 U/ml IL-2. The cell suspension was then distributed at 200 μl/well in culture plates. Working solutions of compounds were prepared extemporaneously in culture medium from their stock solutions and added 1:10 in at least triplicate wells, at the initiation of the cultures. Plates were incubated at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 .  2.5 Measurement of proliferation T cell cultures were pulsed with 2 μCi/well [3 H  ]-TdR (specific activity: 5 Ci/mmole, Amersham) for 4 h on day 2 of culture (mouse) or for 8 h on day 3 of culture (human). Cultures were harvested in a Tomteck harvester (Wallac-LKB, Gaithersburg, MD). Incorporated radioactivity was measured in a Betaplate (Wallac-LKB) liquid scintillation spectrometer. Results were calculated as means of replicate wells and expressed as percent of the control response of cultures stimulated in absence of compound.  2.6 Quantitation of cytokine concentration in culture supernatants For cytokine measurements, supernatants from human T cells were collected after 24 or 48 h of culture and stored at 4°C or at −70°C until analysis. Cytokine levels were quantitated by sandwich ELISA using matched antibody pairs. ELISA plates (Maxisorb, Nunc) were coated overnight with anti-cytokine mAb in 0.1 M carbonate/bicarbonate buffer, pH 9.6. After washing, plates were blocked with casein-containing blocking buffer (Research Diagnostics), and washed again. Appropriately diluted supernatant samples and standards were distributed in duplicate and the plates were incubated for 2 h at room temperature on a horizontal shaker. Plates were washed, incubated for 1 h with biotinylated anti-cytokine Ab and washed again. Plates were then incubated with poly-HRP streptavidin for 30 min at room temperature with shaking. After a final wash, substrate was added (DAKO TMP One-Step Substrate System, DAKO, Carpinteria, CA). The reaction was stopped by addition of 0.2 M sulfuric acid. Plates were read at 450 nm in a Molecular Devices UVmax plate reader (Menlo Park, CA), and the data were calculated using the SOFTtmax program from Molecular Devices. The results were expressed as percent of the control level of cytokine production by cells stimulated in the absence of compound. The 50% inhibitory concentration of compound (IC50 ) was calculated by linear regression analysis.  2.7 Analysis of cytokine mRNA expression by RNase protection assay (RPA) Purified human T cells were cultured in T25 flasks (106 /ml, 20 ml/flask) maintained in an upright position. The cells were incubated at 37°C for 19 h in the presence of the various stimuli, with or without compound, as indicated. Cells were then harvested, centrifuged, transferred to microtubes, and washed with PBS. Cell pellets were frozen at −70°C. Total RNA was extracted using RNAqueous™ RNA isolation kit (Ambion, Austin, TX) and quantitated by absorbance at 260 nm. Cytokine mRNAs were detected with the RiboQuant™ Multi-Probe RPA system from PharMingen (San Diego, CA) using the hCK-1 multiprobe-template. Riboprobes were [32 P  ]-labeled and hybridized overnight with 20 μg of the RNA samples. The hybridized RNA was treated with RNase and purified according to the RiboQuant™ protocol. The samples were then electrophoresed in 6% polyacrylamide Tris–borate–EDTA–urea mini-gels (Novex, San Diego, CA). The gels were dried, exposed and quantitated in a PhosphorImager (Molecular Dynamics, Sunnyvale, CA).  2.8 Flow cytometry (FCM) analysis of CD69 expression Cultures of mouse T cells (106 /ml) for assessment of CD69 induction were set up at 1 ml/well in 24-well plates. Cells received hypothemycin or FK506 and were stimulated with PMA (10 ng/ml) or ionomycin (2 μg/ml). The culture plates were incubated for 14 h at 37°C. At the time of harvesting, the plates were placed on ice for 30 min and the cells were collected using pasteur pipettes. The cells were stained with fluoresceinated anti-CD69 mAb and washed. FCM analysis (10,000 cells/sample) was performed in a FACScan (Becton Dickinson) using propidium iodide and light scatter signals to gate out dead cells and debris.  2.9 Western blot analysis of ERK1/2 phosphorylation Mouse or human T cells (107  in 1 ml culture medium) were preincubated for 1 h at 37°C in absence or presence of compound. The cells were treated with PMA for ERK1/2 stimulation and harvested 10 min thereafter. Samples were placed on ice and spun. Pellets were resuspended in lysing buffer and frozen until analysis. Samples were electrophoresed in 10% tris–glycine polyacrylamide gels. Proteins were transferred from the gels to PVDF membranes by electroblotting in a Milliblot apparatus (Millipore, Bedford, MA). The membranes were reacted with antibodies to ERK1/2 (New England Biolabs). The reaction was detected by chemiluminescence on Hyperfilm-ECL (Amersham, Arlington Heights, IL).   3 Results 3.1 Hypothemycin inhibits T cell proliferation in a manner partially reversible by exogenous IL-2 We first identified hypothemycin (Fig. 1  ), as the active component of a fungal culture broth, in a screen for inhibitors of T cell activation using murine T cells activated with anti-CD3 mAb+PMA. As shown in Fig. 2  a, hypothemycin was found to inhibit the proliferative response in such cultures with an IC50  of 27.6±3.8 nM (n =5). A control compound, zearalenone (Kuiper-Goodman et al., 1987 ), which is structurally related to hypothemycin (Fig. 1 ), failed to affect proliferation under the same conditions. Hypothemycin also potently inhibited the proliferation of purified human T cells stimulated with anti-CD3 mAb in the presence of a low concentration of PMA (0.1 ng/ml), with an IC50 =25.8±8.9 nM (n =6) (Fig. 2 b). The proliferation of human PBMC (T cells+accessory cells: monocytes and B cells) induced by anti-CD3 mAb in the absence of PMA was also potently inhibited by the compound, with an IC50 =57.1±5.5 nM (n =3) (Fig. 2 c). However, stimulation of purified T cells in the presence of PMA at 1 ng/ml, rendered the proliferative response less sensitive to the effect of hypothemycin (IC50 =269.8±58.1 nM, n =5) (Fig. 2 d). The addition of exogenous IL-2 (50 U/ml) was used to determine whether the inhibitory activity of hypothemycin in these cultures reflects non-specific toxicity or a more selective effect. Fig. 2  shows that such an addition resulted in a significant reversal of the inhibition by the compound. In the case of mouse T cells, the IC50  increased to 182.6±17.1 nM (n =5) (Fig. 2 a). For human T cells stimulated with anti-CD3 mAb+PMA at 0.1 ng/ml, the IC50  in presence of exogenous IL-2 was 236.0±66.1 nM (n =6) (Fig. 2 b). Moreover, in the case of human PBMC activated by anti-CD3 mAb alone, the addition of 10% IL-2-containing conditioned medium (T-stim) completely reversed the inhibitory effect of hypothemycin at the concentrations tested here (Fig. 2 c). Addition of exogenous IL-2 to purified T cell cultures stimulated in presence of PMA at 1 ng/ml did not appreciably reduce the sensitivity to hypothemycin, suggesting that IL-2 produced endogenously is not limiting for proliferation under these conditions (data not shown).  3.2 Hypothemycin potently inhibits the secretion of IL-2 but affects to a lesser extent the response to IL-2 The finding that the inhibitory effects of hypothemycin can be reversed by exogeneous IL-2 suggested that the compound may act by interfering with the production of IL-2. We therefore measured IL-2 production in the presence of hypothemycin. These studies were conducted in human T cells. Pilot experiments using cultures stimulated with anti-CD3+PMA at 0.1 ng/ml showed that hypothemycin suppressed IL-2 production (data not shown). However, the level of IL-2 released under these conditions was very low and could not be measured accurately enough by ELISA to permit an estimation of the potency of the inhibition by the compound. Further studies were therefore done on cultures activated with anti-CD3+PMA at 1 ng/ml. With such a strong stimulation, high levels of IL-2 (10–30 ng/ml) were detectable in the supernatants after 24 h of culture. As shown in Fig. 3  a, hypothemycin inhibited this production of the cytokine with an IC50  of 9.2±1.1 nM (n =5), even though under these conditions the proliferation was not potently suppressed (Fig. 2 d) possibly because the residual level of IL-2 still produced in presence of the compound was sufficient to support T cell growth. It was also important to determine the effect of hypothemycin on the responsiveness of T cells to IL-2. For that purpose, we used the IL-2-dependent murine CTLL-2 cell line. As shown in Fig. 3 b, hypothemycin did inhibit the proliferation induced by IL-2 in these cells but with a potency approximately 20-fold lower (IC50 =194.2±13.2 nM, n =8) than for inhibition of IL-2 production by normal T cells. This degree of inhibition of cell proliferation by the compound was actually similar to that observed with normal T cells stimulated in the presence of exogeneous IL-2 (Fig. 2 ).  3.3 Hypothemycin differentially modulates the production of various cytokines Having established that hypothemycin inhibits IL-2 production, it was interesting to determine the effect of this compound on other cytokines known to be secreted by T cells upon activation. This was done using human T cells activated for 2 days with anti-CD3+PMA at 1 ng/ml, such that the levels of various cytokines released in the supernatants were within the range of sensitivity of ELISA measurements. At this time-point, hypothemycin still potently inhibited the production of IL-2 (IC50 =12.9±1.8 nM, n =10, Fig. 4  a and data not shown). The data in Fig. 4  demonstrate that hypothemycin also strongly suppressed the production of IL-6 (IC50 =9.5±1.1 nM), IL-10 (IC50 =18.5±2.6 nM), IFN-γ (IC50 =17.7±3.7 nM) and TNF-α (IC50 =10.8±1.6 nM). However, in the same cultures, the compound was found to exert a strikingly different dose-dependent effect on the levels of IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13. Although completely suppressed at 264 nM, the production of all three of these cytokines was markedly augmented, by up to 8-fold, in the presence of 33–66 nM hypothemycin (EC50 ∼10 nM). In these experiments, zearalenone did not substantially alter the production of any of the cytokines tested.  3.4 Hypothemycin affects cytokine production at the mRNA level To define at which stage of the induction process hypothemycin alters the production of cytokines, we next examined its effect on cytokine mRNA expression. Human T cells (106 /ml) were activated with anti-CD3 mAb+PMA (1 ng/ml) in the presence or absence of hypothemycin, or zearalenone. After 19 h of culture, total RNA was extracted and the expression of transcripts for multiple cytokines was detected by multiprobe RPA analysis. As shown in Fig. 5  , hypothemycin strongly suppressed IL-2 mRNA induction in a dose-dependent manner, while zearalenone had no effect. Hypothemycin also clearly inhibited the expression of transcripts for IL-10 and IFN-γ. In contrast, the expression of transcripts for IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13 was enhanced, with a maximal effect in the presence of 66 nM hypothemycin. Again, zearalone did not alter this expression. Therefore, for these particular cytokines, the modulation of mRNA expression parallels that of protein secretion as detected in culture supernatants (Fig. 4 ), suggesting that hypothemycin affects predominantly gene transcription and/or transcript stability. Note that hypothemycin was also found to inhibit IL-9 mRNA expression in these experiments (Fig. 5 ).  3.5 Hypothemycin inhibits more strongly CD69 expression induced by PMA than by ionomycin As mentioned before, cytokine induction upon T cell activation depends on multiple signaling pathways (Cantrell, 1996 ; Alberola-Ila et al., 1997 ). As an approach to start delineating the site of action of hypothemycin within T cell signaling events, we used an artificial model where the activation of the T cells is monitored by induction of expression of the cell surface molecule CD69. This induction can be promoted upon treatment either by PMA, which recruits PKC-dependent, calcineurin-independent signaling, including the ERK1/2 kinase pathway, or by the Ca2+  ionophore, ionomycin, which mimics Ca2+  signaling and activates calcineurin (Taylor-Fishwick and Siegel, 1995 ). Previously, we have shown that PD98059, a selective inhibitor of MEK1 (Dudley et al., 1995 ), markedly suppresses the CD69 response induced by PMA but not by ionomycin, while the reverse is true for the calcineurin inhibitor, FK506 (Dumont et al., 1998 ). The data in Fig. 6   demonstrate that incubation of mouse T cells for 14 h in the presence of PMA (10 ng/ml) induced a high level of CD69 cell surface expression. This induction was suppressed in a dose-dependent manner by hypothemycin, whereas FK506 (10 nM) had little effect. In contrast, CD69 expression elicited by treatment with ionomycin (2 μg/ml) was less inhibited by hypothemycin than by FK506. Therefore, hypothemycin appears to preferentially disrupt CD69-induction events driven by PKC activation while leaving relatively unaffected those driven by calcineurin activation.  3.6 Effects of hypothemycin on ERK1/2 activation in T cells Since one of the signaling pathways activated by PMA in T cells is the ERK1/2 MAP kinase, through activation of its upstream kinase, MEK (Dumont et al., 1998 ), the CD69 data mentioned above led us to investigate the effect of hypothemycin on this cascade at the biochemical level in T cells. Activation of ERK1/2 MAP kinase is known to be reflected by selective phosphorylation of these enzymes which can be detected using phosphospecific antibodies. The data in Fig. 7  a show that PMA treatment of human T cells (107  cells/ml) resulted within 10 min in the emergence of the phosphorylated forms of ERK1/2 as seen by immunoblot analysis of the cell lysates. This was inhibited by hypothemycin at 3 and 0.3 μM but not by zearalenone at 3 μM. PD98059, used here as a positive control, also inhibited ERK1/2 phosphorylation. These compounds did not affect the levels of ERK1/2 protein detectable with a phosphorylation-independent antibody (Fig. 7 b). Similar data were obtained in murine T cells activated with PMA at 10 ng/ml (data not shown).   4 Discussion Through screening of microbial broths, we have identified the immunosuppressive activity of hypothemycin, a compound previously known for its antibiotic activity (Nair and Carey, 1980 ; Nair et al., 1981 ; Agatsuma et al., 1993 ). The present study provides evidence that hypothemycin affects certain events of T cell activation that lead to cytokine production and proliferation. It is important to note that while the antibiotic/cytotoxic properties of hypothemycin were seen only in the high micromolar range (Nair and Carey, 1980 ; Nair et al., 1981 ; Agatsuma et al., 1993 ), the effects on T cells reported here occurred at nanomolar concentrations of the compound. Furthermore, a structurally related compound, zearalenone, which has estrogenic activity in vivo (Kuiper-Goodman et al., 1987 ) had no discernable effect at micromolar concentrations in our experimental system. In this study, we have mostly utilized artificial modes of stimulation of the T cells, through anti-CD3 mAb and PMA co-treatments, causing a vigorous polyclonal activation of the T cells. Under these conditions, hypothemycin was found to inhibit the proliferative response. It is important to note that, in fact, this inhibitory activity did not require PMA costimulation since it was also observed with human PBMC stimulated with anti-CD3 mAb alone. Moreover, the inhibition of T cell proliferation by hypothemycin was partially reversed by exogeneous IL-2, a feature similar to the inhibition by agents known to suppress IL-2 production rather than IL-2-responsiveness, such as CsA and FK506 (Dumont, 1996 ). Accordingly, hypothemycin inhibited potently the production of IL-2 both at the protein and mRNA levels. This production was found to be affected even under conditions where hypothemycin had reduced activity on the proliferation, namely upon activation of human T cells in the presence of 1 ng/ml PMA. It is likely that, in this situation, the residual amount of IL-2 secreted in the presence of hypothemycin was high enough to support the proliferation of the cells. Indeed, the fact that the antiproliferative effect of hypothemycin in activated T cells is dependent on the strength of the stimulation further argues in favor of a selective mode of action for the compound. The T cell stimulation modality utilized here, leading to an array of cytokines being produced in sufficient amounts for accurate quantitation enabled us to examine the effect of hypothemycin on this production. Besides IL-2, the production of IL-6, IL-9 (detected at the mRNA level), IL-10, IFN-γ and TNF-α, was found to be strongly inhibited by hypothemycin. Therefore, this compound interrupts signaling events of T cell activation that are required for the positive regulation of these cytokines. In marked contrast, there was a pronounced augmentation of secretion of IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13 in presence of certain concentrations of the compound. RPA analysis further demonstrated that hypothemycin affects gene regulation rather than translational events governing the synthesis of these cytokines. Since IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13 are mainly produced by Th2 cells (Muraille and Leo, 1998 ), their up-regulation under conditions where the other cytokines were suppressed is particularly intriguing. Such a differential modulation by hypothemycin may point to distinct signaling mechanisms for induction of certain Th2 versus Th1 cytokines, as indicated by a number of recent studies (Zheng and Flavell, 1997 ; Ranganath et al., 1998 ; Dong et al., 1998 ; Kuo and Leiden, 1999 ; Li et al., 1999 ). In this respect, hypothemycin may provide a useful probe to explore these mechanisms. It is also striking that the differential modulation of cytokine production by hypothemycin shown here differs from the modulation exerted by FK506 under similar conditions but resembles what we previously disclosed in the case of the MEK1 inhibitor, PD98059 (Dumont et al., 1998 ). Further evidence that hypothemycin may affect T cell signaling events in a manner distinct from FK5065 and similar to PD98059 was obtained by studying the effect of the compounds on CD69 induction. Although CD69 induction may occur independently from cytokine induction (Castellanos et al., 1997 ), it provides a convenient model to probe for the site of action of T cell inhibitors as it can be elicited either through PKC-dependent, calcineurin-independent mechanisms by PMA or through Ca2+ /calcineurin-dependent mechanisms by ionomycin (Taylor-Fishwick and Siegel, 1995 ). Hypothemycin inhibited markedly the PMA-induced response but to a lesser extend the ionomycin-induced response, whereas FK506 exerted an opposite pattern of inhibition. In a previous study, we had shown that PD98059 also is able to inhibit CD69 induction by PMA but not by ionomycin (Dumont et al., 1998 ). The similarities between the cellular effects of hypothemycin and of PD98059 led us to examine whether hypothemycin would prevent activation of the MAP kinases ERK1/2 in T cells. Our data demonstrated that hypothemycin does reduce the phosphorylation of these enzymes when induced by PMA treatment in T cells. These data suggest that hypothemycin is capable of disrupting the ERK1/2 cascade in T cells, even though it is difficult to relate directly this biochemical alteration to the effects of the compound on proliferation and cytokine production, because of the artificial stimulus utilized (PMA), and also because the cell concentrations were different (107 /ml vs. 5×105 /ml) in the two systems. Nevertheless, our observations are consistent with a recent studies revealing that hypothemycin potently inhibits the enzymatic activity MEK1 in vitro, with an IC50  of 15 nM (Zhao et al., 1999 ). Furthermore, analysis of several hypothemycin analogs revealed a correlation between their abilities to inhibit MEK1 in vitro and to inhibit IL-2 and up-regulate IL-4 production in T cells (Camacho and Dumont, unpublished observations). A close structural relative of hypothemycin, Ro 09-2210, was also reported to suppress T cell proliferation and to inhibit MEK1 with an IC50  of 59 nM (Williams et al., 1998 ). Importantly, these latter studies have also shown that neither hypothemycin (Zhao et al., 1999 ) nor Ro 09-2210 (Williams et al., 1998 ) alter the enzymatic activity of PKC in vitro. Therefore, the inhibitory effect of hypothemycin on T cell activation may be attributed, at least partially, to a blockade of MEK1 function, rather than a direct effect on PKC. However, in experiments not shown here, we obtained preliminary evidence that MEK may not be the only biochemical target for hypothemycin in T cells since JNK activation by anisomycin was also affected by this compound. In this respect, hypothemycin appears to differ from PD98059, which does not inhibit JNK activation (Dudley et al., 1995 ). At the moment, we cannot rule out that hypothemycin alters other targets, in addition to the ERK and JNK pathways. This might well be the case at micromolar concentrations of the compound where its inhibitory effect on proliferation is no longer reversed by exogeneous IL-2. Additional biochemical analyses of the effect of hypothemycin in T cells, especially when stimulated through the CD3/TCR complex, will be required to better delineate the selectivity of this compound. While the precise mechanism of action of hypothemycin remains to be defined, the present studies demonstrated that it acts as a potent, non cytotoxic inhibitor of T cell activation, in a manner different from a calcineurin inhibitor. Further evaluation of the immunosuppressive activity of hypothemycin and of its potential ability to promote T cell anergy (DeSilva et al., 1996 ; Li et al., 1996 ; Powell et al., 1998 ) therefore appears justified.   Acknowledgements We wish to thank Jeanine Regenthal and Paul Fischer for assistance with the FCM analysis experiments.   
