 Dopamine (DA) is a neurotransmitter that plays a fundamental role in the control of a variety of physiological functions including locomotor movement, learning, reward behavior, and hormone synthesis and release [40] . However, overflow of DA in the brain has been suggested to participate in certain neurodegenerative processes. These include ischemia [6] , hypoxia [2] , and neurotoxicities induced by excitatory amino acids [16] and methamphetamine [38] . In all of the above cases, striatal DA availability in the brain is significantly increased. For example, the striatal DA concentration rapidly reaches concentrations as high as 0.2 mM after ligation of the cervical artery in the gerbil ischemic model [45] . Depletion of endogenous DA by chemical lesion of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway reduces ischemic insult to the striatum [17] . Direct intrastriatal injections of DA result in apoptosis and neurodegeneration [18, 19] . This DA neurotoxicity is believed to be mediated through a DA-oxidation-associated pathway. DA oxidative stress is also assumed to be a major pathological factor that contributes to dopaminergic neuronal degeneration in Parkinson's disease [14] . We have recently demonstrated that DA induces apoptosis involving the oxidation–JNK–c-Jun activation pathway in in vitro cell cultures [32] and activation of transcription factors AP-1 and NF-κB in an in vivo rat model [29] . Direct intrastriatal injections of high concentrations of DA in rats also result in activation of astrocytes as indicated by an increase of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunocytochemical staining and astrocyte proliferation determined by [3 H  ]R05-4864 binding to peripheral benzodiazepine receptors on astrocytes [15] . Astrocytes are the intimate partners of neurons and play important physiological roles in the maintenance of the microenvironment of neurons, including sequestration and metabolism of various neurotransmitters, and production of proinflammatory and immunomodulatory cytokines and neuropeptides [50] . In the rat ischemic model, activated striatal astrocytes appear to play a protective role for DA-innervated neurons [51] . In a cell culture system, striatal astrocytes were also shown to have a protective effect against hydrogen peroxide toxicity in dopaminergic neurons [24] . Nevertheless, the mechanism by which DA activates astrocytes is unknown. To investigate potential signaling of activation of astrocytes by DA, we have chosen a rat C6 glioma cell line stably expressing DA D2L receptors based on the following reasons. (1) C6 glioma cells have been widely used as a model of glial phenotype [5, 39] . (2) Recent evidence suggests that D2 receptors are expressed in striatal astrocytes. Physiologically, DA can induce membrane hyperpolarization in the majority of astrocytes from the striatum, which can be inhibited by application of domperidone, a D2 receptor antagonist [21] . D2 antagonists, [3 H  ]domperidone and [3 H  ]spiperone, can specifically label striatal astrocytes [20] . D2 receptor mRNA can be detected by either in situ hybridization or polymerase chain reaction from astrocytes in striatum, an area enriched with dopaminergic termini, but not astrocytes in cerebellum, which receives little dopaminergic innervation [4] . This region-specific expression of D2 receptors suggests that dopaminergic neurons may physiologically influence astrocyte functions. (3) C6-D2L cells stably express recombinant D2L DA receptors [36] . The expression level of D2 receptors in C6-D2L cells is about 188 fmol/mg protein, which is close to that in striatal membranes (∼400 fmol/mg protein) [30, 37] . (4) Like native neuronal D2 receptors, the binding of agonist to D2 receptors in the C6-D2L cells is functionally coupled to pertussis-toxin-sensitive G proteins, resulting in inhibition of adenylate cyclase [49] and activation of both extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) [30] . Given the fact of C6 glial phenotype and D2 receptors in striatal astrocytes, the biological functions stimulated by D2 receptors observed in C6-D2L cells may mimic those produced in vivo. Thus, this C6-D2L cell line may serve as a good in vitro cell culture model for studies of DA regulation of glial response. Using this C6-D2L cell line, we have previously reported that nanomolar levels of DA stimulate cell proliferation through activation of both ERKs and JNK [30] . In the present study, we have found that high concentrations (micromolar levels) of DA stimulate a delayed mitogenesis compared to that induced by the nanomolar levels of DA. This DA-stimulated mitogenesis requires D2-receptor-mediated intracellular redox–tyrosine kinase cascade, but does not need ERK activation. In addition, micromolar levels of DA also increase GFAP expression, which is linked to a D2-receptor-independent p38 MAPK activation.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Materials Antibodies against phosphorylated tyrosine (PY99) and ERK2 were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). Antibodies against phospho-specific ERK and phospho-specific p38 MAPK were from New England Biolabs (Beverly, MA). DA, (+)- and (−)-butaclamol hydrochloride, and (−)-quinpirole hydrochloride were from Research Biochemicals International (Natick, MA). PD098059, p38 inhibitor SB 203580, diphenyleneiodonium chloride (DPI), Herbimycin A, Wortmannin, H7, and staurosporine were from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). Pertussis toxin (PTX) and N -acetyl-l -cysteine (NAC) were from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). [3 H  ]Thymidine was purchased form Amersham (Arlington Heights, IL). Genistein was from Gibco BRL (Gaithersburg, MD). Hoechst 33342 was from Molecular Probes (Eugene, OR).  2.2 Cell culture and treatments Stably transfected C6-D2L cells were prepared as described [46] and maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum and 5% donor calf serum with penicillin/streptomycin and puromycin (2 μg/ml). The wild-type C6 cells were maintained in the above medium without puromycin. For tyrosine phosphorylation and GFAP studies, the cells were starved with serum-free medium containing 0.025% ascorbic acid for 6–8 h and then stimulated with indicated reagents. All reagents were prepared or diluted with DMEM plus 0.025% ascorbic acid. For inhibitory experiments, all inhibitory reagents except PTX were added 0.5 h (PTX for 6 h) prior to stimulation with DA.  2.3 Lysate preparation After stimulation, the cells were immediately washed twice using cold PBS and then solubilized with ice-cold buffer consisting of 25 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2 , 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1% Triton X-100, 20 mM β-glycerophosphate, 0.1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 0.5 mM DTT, 100 μg/ml PMSF, and 2 μg/ml leupeptin. Cellular extracts were cleared by centrifugation for 30 min at 14,000 rpm at 4°C. The supernatants were saved and the protein concentration was determined using Bio-Rad protein reagent. For determination of GFAP, the cell lysates were prepared as follows. Stimulated cells were scraped and collected by centrifugation for 5 min at 3000 rpm. The cell pellets were washed once with cold PBS, pH 7.4, solubilized with hot lysis buffer (80–90°C) containing 10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mm EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM PMSF, 1 μg/ml pepstatin A, and 2 μg/ml aprotinin, and heated for 20 min at 90°C. The protein concentration of the lysates was determined by using Micro BCA (Pierce, Rockford, IL). All lysates were used immediately or aliquoted and stored at −70°C for further use.  2.4 Immunoblotting Equal amounts of lysate protein (40 μg/lane) were run on 8–16% SDS-PAGE and electrophoretically transferred to nitrocellulose. The nitrocellulose blot was blocked with 10% non-fat dry milk in TBST buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, and 0.01% Tween-20) and then incubated with primary antibodies (phospho-specific ERK, ERK2, phospho-specific p38 MAPK, or PY99, 1:1000) in TBST containing 5% BSA overnight at 4°C. The immunoreactive bands were detected by sequential incubation with horseradish-peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (1:5000, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA) and Renaissance substrate (DuPont; Boston, MA). For control of protein loading, immunoblotting with ERK2 was performed using either a sister gel or a stripped blot. For quantitative studies, the band was quantified with the NIH Image 1.55 Program. The results were normalized to fold of control and presented as means±S.E.M.  2.5 Measurement of mitogenesis The procedures were described elsewhere [31] . C6-D2L cells (1×105 /ml, 0.2 ml/well) were plated in a 96-well plate and grown for 24 h. The cells were rinsed twice with serum-free DMEM and starved for 8 h in serum-free medium containing 0.025% ascorbic acid. After that, the cells were incubated with DA for 23 h and pulsed with 2 μCi [3 H  ]thymidine per well for an additional 6 h. The cells in each well were fixed with ice-cold 5% trichloroacetic acid, washed three times with cold STE buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.2, 1 mM EDTA), and solubilized with 0.1 ml of a mixture of 0.1% SDS and 0.01 N NaOH. Incorporated [3 H  ]thymidine was counted with a Beckman liquid scintillation counter and expressed as counts per minute per well (cpm/well).  2.6 Cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry Cell cycle analysis was performed according to the method by Chrest et al. [9] . Briefly, C6-D2L cells were plated in 35 mm dishes, and seeded overnight. The cells were starved for 8 h by replacing the mixture of DMEM plus 0.025% ascorbic acid and stimulated for 29 h. The cells were then collected and suspended in complete cell culture medium. The cells (1×106  cells/ml) were treated with 1 μM Hoechst 33342 for 30 min at 37°C. Cells were analyzed for DNA content using a FACStarplus  flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson Immunocytometry System, San Jose, CA) equipped with argon and krypton lasers. Hoechst 33342 stained cells were excited with 350–356 nm wavelength UV light from the krypton laser and the fluorescence emission was collected with a 424-nm filter. DNA histograms were acquired by collecting a total of 10,000 events. Cell compartments, including G1 , S, and G2 /M phases, were determined using the Multicycle software (Phoenix Flow Systems, San Diego, CA).   3 Results 3.1 DA stimulates mitogenesis We have previously reported that nanomolar levels of DA stimulated mitogenesis in C6-D2L cells [30] . The maximal [3 H  ]thymidine incorporation into DNA occurs at 17 h after exposure to 100 nM DA concentration. We extended this study by observing the cell response at high DA concentrations and longer exposure. Interestingly, micromolar levels of DA also stimulate DNA synthesis but with a slower time course (about 29 h after DA stimulation, data not shown). Under these conditions, DA stimulated [3 H  ]thymidine incorporation in a concentration-dependent manner (Fig. 1  a). The [3 H  ]thymidine incorporation into DNA was linearly increased from 0.1 to 500 μM DA. The mitogenic activity at 500 μM DA was about 3.2±0.2 times higher than that of control group. This DA-induced mitogenesis could be completely inhibited in the presence of aphidicoline (20 μg/ml, data not shown), a potent DNA polymerase a inhibitor. To confirm the DA mitogenic activation, we also determined the cell cycle distribution. As shown in Table 1  , 200 μM DA increased the percentage of the cells in S phase and decreased the percentage of cells in G1  phase, suggesting that DA promotes progression through the cell cycle. Next, we tested whether this DA-stimulated mitogenesis requires activation of D2 receptors. Pretreatment of the C6-D2L cells with 10 μM (+)-butaclamol, a potent D2 receptor antagonist, completely inhibited DA-induced DNA [3 H  ]thymidine incorporation, while 10 μM (−)-butaclamol, an inactive form of (+)-butaclamol, had no effect on the DA-stimulated mitogenesis (Fig. 1 b). To confirm these results, we determined the effect of quinpirole, a specific D2 receptor agonist, on cell cycling. Like the effect of micromolar levels of DA, micromolar levels of quinpirole promoted cell proliferation. Quinpirole increased the percentage of cells in S phase and decreased the percentage in G1  phase (Table 1 ). Furthermore, we did not observe any mitogenic effect within a DA concentration range of 0–500 μM in wild-type C6 cells without expression of D2L receptors (Fig. 1 a). Instead, [3 H  ]thymidine incorporation into DNA of wild-type C6 cells was decreased about 20–26% at DA concentrations from 10 to 500 μM (Fig. 1 a). Pretreatment of the C6-D2L cells with 100 ng/ml PTX, a G protein-receptor uncoupler, partially blocked DA-stimulated [3 H  ]thymidine incorporation into DNA (Fig. 1 b). Thus, it appears that this DA-stimulated mitogenesis requires DA D2 receptor activation.  3.2 Effects of kinase inhibitors on DA-induced mitogenesis In order to examine the signaling that mediates the DA-stimulated mitogenesis, we first tested the effect of DA on the activity of ERK, a protein serine kinase that is linked to cell proliferation stimulated by growth factors, cytokines and neurotransmitters [11, 34] . As shown in the phospho-specific ERK immunoblot of Fig. 2  a, DA had little or no effect on ERK phosphorylation at concentrations corresponding to its mitogenic effect (10–500 μM), although DA at lower concentrations did stimulate ERK phosphorylation and activity [30] . The bottom panel in Fig. 2 a shows ERK2 immunoblot of a sister gel, indicating that a similar amount of protein was loaded. To confirm that ERK was not involved in DA-induced mitogenesis, we also examined the effect of PD098059, a selective MEK1 inhibitor [3] , on DA-induced mitogenesis. As shown in Fig. 2 b, the DA-stimulated DNA synthesis was only partially inhibited by pretreatment of the cells with PD 098059 (10–50 μM) (Fig. 2 b). With application of either 10 or 50 μM PD 098059, bFGF-stimulated ERK activity, as indicated by ERK phosphorylation, was greatly or completely inhibited, respectively (Fig. 2 c), which serves as a positive control of the inhibitory effect of PD098059 on MEK1–ERK pathway. Taken together, these data suggest that the mitogenesis induced by micromolar levels of DA is not mediated by a MEK–ERK activation pathway. We have also tested other kinase inhibitors on DA-stimulated mitogenesis. These inhibitors included Wortmannin for PI3 kinase, rapamycin for S6 kinase, and SB203580 for p38 MAP kinase. Staurosporine and H7 are inhibitors for a broad spectrum of protein kinases, which include protein kinase A, protein kinase C, protein kinase G, CaM kinase, and myosin light chain kinase. The effect of depletion of PKC on DA-stimulated [3 H  ]thymidine incorporation into DNA was also examined by prolonged treatment of the cells with PMA. The data are summarized on Table 2  . All these treatments had no effect on DA-induced DNA synthesis.  3.3 DA stimulates mitogenesis-associated protein tyrosine phosphorylation DA stimulated protein tyrosine phosphorylation in a time- and concentration-dependent manner (Fig. 3  a and b). The phosphorylated tyrosine-containing proteins were easily immunodetected with monoclonal anti-phosphotyrosine IgG (PY99). When C6-D2L cells were treated with 200 μM DA, protein tyrosine phosphorylation rapidly increased within 5 min, reached a maximum between 15 and 30 min, then decreased by 1 h (Fig. 3 a). A majority of tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins were located within the molecular size range of 50–200 kDa, some of which are indicated by arrows in Fig. 3 a. DA-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation was evident within DA concentrations ranging from 10 to 500 μM (Fig. 3 b), which paralleled the DA concentrations for stimulation of mitogenesis (Fig. 1 a). To monitor the amounts of protein loaded, all blots were stripped and then immunoblotted with anti-ERK2. The lower anti-ERK2 immunoblottings in Fig. 3 a and b show that a similar amount of protein was loaded. This protein tyrosine phosphorylation, mostly at molecular sizes between 50 and 150 kDa, required D2 receptor activation. Preincubation of C6-D2L cells 30 min with (+)-butaclamol, a specific D2 receptor antagonist, could block DA-induced protein tyrosine phosphorylation (Fig. 3 c). This antagonistic effect was concentration-dependent. Increasing (+)-butaclamol from 1 to 100 μM resulted in significant inhibition of protein tyrosine phosphorylation. Especially in the presence of 100 μM (+)-butaclamol, the cells failed to respond to 200 μM DA stimulation (upper left panel, Fig. 3 c). This blocking effect was specific to D2 receptors since application of the same amount of (−)-butaclamol, an inactive form of (+)-butaclamol, did not show any effect on DA-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation. We have also directly tested the effect of quinpirole, a D2 receptor agonist, on protein tyrosine phosphorylation. As shown in the right panel of Fig. 3 c, increasing quinpirole from 10 to 200 μM resulted in a great increase in the amount of tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins. Furthermore, we could not observe significant changes in tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins in wild-type C6 cells treated with DA concentrations from 10 to 500 μM (data not shown). Inactivation of cellular PTX-sensitive G proteins by PTX partially blocked DA-induced protein tyrosine phosphorylation. We have quantified tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins between 50 and 150 kDa by using the NIH Image 1.55 Program. Pretreatment of the cells with 500 ng/ml PTX inhibited DA (200 μM)-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation by 57±15% (n =3). PTX at a concentration of 100 ng/ml also reduced the tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins by 24±13% (n =3). Coincidentally, this percentage of reduction of tyrosine phosphorylation by 100 ng/ml PTX is close to its inhibitory ability (32±10%, n =3, Fig. 1 b) to DA-stimulated mitogenesis. Thus, these results suggest that D2 receptor activation is associated with protein tyrosine kinase activity. In order to test the idea that tyrosine kinase is involved in DA-stimulated mitogenesis, we examined the effect of genistein, a potent tyrosine kinase inhibitor, on DA-induced tyrosine phosphorylation and mitogenesis. As shown in Fig. 4  a, preincubation of either genistein or herbimycin (another tyrosine kinase inhibitor) significantly blocked the protein tyrosine phosphorylation stimulated by 200 μM DA. Application of 10 μM genistein completely inhibited the DNA synthesis induced by DA (Fig. 4 b). These observations indicate that the activation of protein tyrosine kinase is required for the promotion of mitogenesis induced by DA.  3.4 DA-induced mitogenesis is involved in an intracellular redox–tyrosine phosphorylation pathway Although reactive oxygen species (ROS) are implicated in pathological cellular processes, including oxidative stress damage [47] and ischemic neuronal injury [10] , recent evidence suggests that ROS are involved in cell signaling that regulates proliferation and DNA synthesis [22] . To test the idea that D2 receptors stimulate mitogenesis through regulation of an intracellular redox–tyrosine kinase cascade, we examined the effect of diphenylene iodonium (DPI) and N -acetyl cysteine (NAC) on DA-induced tyrosine phosphorylation and mitogenesis. DPI is an inhibitor of flavonoid-containing oxidases that can catalyze the formation of superoxide from oxygen with NADH/NADPH as an electron donor [28, 43] . Some flavonoid-containing oxidases, such as NADPH-dependent oxidase, have been shown to be regulated by a variety of membrane receptors, such as intrinsic tyrosine-kinase-containing receptors and G-protein-coupled receptors [22, 23] . NAC is an antioxidant that can scavenge free radicals. Pretreatment of C6-D2L cells with either 1 μM DPI or 20 mM NAC greatly reduced tyrosine phosphorylation and consequent mitogenesis induced by DA (Fig. 5  a and b). Either DPI or NAC itself has no effect on tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins (Fig. 5 ). The anti-ERK2 immunoblotting of same stripped blot shows that a similar amount of protein was loaded in each lane (lower panel, Fig. 5 a). Thus, these results suggest that the protein tyrosine kinase and consequent mitogenesis may be regulated by intracellular ROS, which are assumed to be produced by flavonoid-containing oxidases. Next, we tested the roles of ROS in DA-induced tyrosine phosphorylation and mitogenesis by application of exogenous H2 O2 . We assumed that the protein tyrosine kinase could be activated by DA-stimulated increase of intracellular ROS. If this is the case, exogenous application of low concentrations of H2 O2  may enhance protein kinase activity and subsequent mitogenesis induced by DA. As shown in Fig. 6  a, increasing extracellular H2 O2  concentrations did result in increase of DA-induced tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins. The upper panel shows anti-phosphotyrosine immunoblotting, while the lower panel is a quantified data (from 50 to 150 kDa) of at least three experiments using the NIH Image 1.55 Program. The sister gel was run and immunostained with anti-ERK2 to monitor protein loading. The nanomolar levels of H2 O2  enhanced by about 2.7-fold amounts of tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins stimulated by 10 μM DA, although H2 O2  levels below 1 nM show only a small effect (Fig. 6 a). Furthermore, an enhancement effect of H2 O2  on DA-stimulated mitogenesis was also observed (Fig. 6 b). However, the capability of increasing DA-induced mitogenesis at nanomolar levels of H2 O2  was reduced when compared with that at 0.1 pM H2 O2  (Fig. 6 b). This may be due to a dual effect of ROS in cell proliferation: a stimulatory effect at low concentrations and a toxic effect at high concentrations [22] . With the application of H2 O2  alone without DA, C6-D2L cells did exhibit such a dual mitogenic effect (data not shown).  3.5 DA increases GFAP expression In addition to stimulating DNA synthesis, DA at micromolar levels also significantly increased the expression of GFAP, a sensitive parameter serving as another criterion of reactive astrocytes [33] . As shown in Fig. 7  a, C6-D2L cells responded to DA (200 μM) treatment with an increase in GFAP expression in a time-dependent manner. Between 0 and 48 h after stimulation, the amount of GFAP was increased about 2.1±0.1-fold (Fig. 7 a). Concentration dependence studies carried out at 24 h showed that maximal stimulation of GFAP expression occurred at 200 μM DA (Fig. 7 b). Interestingly, GFAP production was decreased when the cells were exposed to 500 μM DA for 24 h (Fig. 7 b), which differs from the dose–response data of DA-induced mitogenesis (Fig. 1 ). This observation suggests that DA stimulatory GFAP synthesis may be regulated by a different pathway from mitogenesis. Alternatively, this decrease of GFAP expression at 500 μM DA may be due to widespread mitogenesis since immature astrocytes have a less amount of GFAP expression.  3.6 DA-induced GFAP generation involves activation of p38 MAPK It became important to determine whether DA-stimulated GFAP production might also be required to activate the D2 receptor–tyrosine kinase pathway. To test this idea, we used a paradigm similar to that for DA-stimulated mitogenesis in C6-D2L cells (Fig. 1 ). Surprisingly, the GFAP stimulation did not appear to be regulated by D2 receptors since it was not influenced by the D2 receptor antagonist, (+)-butaclamol (Fig. 8  a). Application of DA to wild-type C6 cells also resulted in a similar increase in GFAP expression as that in C6-D2L cells (data not shown). Moreover, direct application of quinpirole (200 μM), a D2 receptor agonist, had no effect on GFAP expression (Fig. 8 a). Pretreatment of the C6-D2L cells with PTX for 6 h had no effect on DA-stimulated GFAP generation (Fig. 8 a), suggesting that PTX-sensitive G proteins might also not be involved. Pretreatment of the cells with either 10 μM genistein or 20 mM NAC also had no effect on GFAP expression due to DA (Fig. 8 a), while the identical treatments resulted in the blocking of DA-induced mitogenesis (Fig. 4 b, Fig. 5 b). PD098059 also had no effect on DA-stimulated GFAP expression (Fig. 8 a). Thus, unlike DA-induced mitogenesis, GFAP stimulation does not seem to involve the D2 receptor–tyrosine kinase pathway. However, we have found that GFAP expression stimulated by DA could be inhibited by pretreatment of the cells with SB203580, a selective p38 MAPK inhibitor [13, 27] . As shown in Fig. 8 b, application of 10 μM SB 203580 completely blocked the increases in GFAP generation stimulated by DA at concentrations ranging from 10 to 200 μM, suggesting that activation of p38 MAPK might be required for the regulation of GFAP generation. By using anti-phospho-specific p38 MAPK immunoblotting, we examined the effect of DA on p38 MAPK phosphorylation, a requirement for p38 MAPK activity [42] . With the application of 100 μM DA to C6-D2L cells, p38 MAPK was rapidly phosphorylated within 5 min, reached a maximum at 15 min, then gradually decreased to basal level by about 1 h (Fig. 9  a). The p38 MAPK phosphorylation was greatly increased when the cells were exposed to DA concentrations ranging from 10 to 200 μM for 15 min (Fig. 9 b). Pretreatment of the cells with (+)-butaclamol had no effect on DA-stimulated phosphorylation of p38 MAPK (Fig. 9 c). These data suggest that DA-activated p38 MAPK may not be mediated by D2 receptors.   4 Discussion In this paper, we report that micromolar levels of DA stimulate mitogenesis in C6-D2L cells. In contrast with our previous report for earlier mitogenesis (peaking at 17 h) induced by nanomolar levels of DA [30] , this mitogenesis stimulated by micromolar levels of DA occurs at about 29 h. Biochemically, the earlier phase of mitogenesis requires D2 receptor–MAPK signaling, while the later phase requires the D2-receptor–tyrosine kinase pathway. Although relationship of the two phases of DA-induced mitogenesis is not clear, the different signaling mechanisms suggest that they are not likely to be dependent on each other. For example, nanomolar levels of DA strongly stimulate MAPK without significant protein tyrosine phosphorylation and the mitogenesis can be inhibited by blockers of MAPK pathway. Micromolar levels of DA strongly stimulate protein tyrosine kinase without effect on MAPK, and the consequent mitogenesis can be blocked by tyrosine kinase inhibitors but not by blockers of the MAPK pathway. Under normal physiological conditions, striatal astrocytes surround dopaminergic neurons. Although the astrocytes do not have synaptic contact with dopaminergic neurons, D2 receptors in astrocytes may sense DA (low concentrations) that might escape from the synapse and play a physiological role via the MAPK pathway. In pathologic conditions, such as ischemia, hypoxia and excitatory amino acid-induced neurotoxicity, the extracellular DA concentration in striata is significantly increased to micromolar levels [2, 6, 45] . Although the length of DA exposure in our cell culture was relatively long, the signaling responses, such as protein tyrosine phosphorylation and p38 MAPK phosphorylation, were rapid, within a few minutes (Fig. 3 a, Fig. 9 a). Thus, the micromolar level DA-induced activation of astrocytes may be implicated in these pathologic conditions. Our results suggest that micromolar levels of DA activate C6-D2L cells through an interaction with receptors. This is evident since DA-stimulated mitogenesis can be blocked by (+)-butaclamol, a selective D2 DA receptor antagonist, with no effect of (−)-butaclamol, an inactive isoform of (+)-butaclamol. Quinpirole, a specific D2 receptor agonist, also promotes cell cycle progression. Furthermore, wild-type C6 cells, lacking the expression of D2 receptors, exhibit no mitogenic response to stimulation by DA. This also ruled out the possibility that the mitogenesis might be mediated by ROS produced by DA autoxidation. However, considering the fact that C6 cells contain other monoamine receptors, such as β adrenergic receptors [35] , we cannot exclude the possibility that micromolar levels of DA may also non-specifically stimulate these receptors and may cooperate with DA receptors. A receptor-mediated mechanism may also be involved in GFAP upregulation stimulated by DA since GFAP synthesis could not be prevented by preincubation with 20 mM NAC, which can scavenge ROS generated either by DA oxidation or through a D2-receptor-mediated redox system. Although the type of receptor involved in DA-stimulated GFAP expression is currently unknown, it would appear not to be D2 receptors since both wild-type C6 and C6-D2L cells gave a similar GFAP regulatory response to DA stimulation. One potential candidate would be β adrenergic receptors, shown to stimulate GFAP expression through cAMP [44] . High-concentration DA-stimulated mitogenesis appears to involve the intracellular production of ROS as supported by the following evidence. First, DA-stimulated mitogenesis can be inhibited by DPI. DPI has been demonstrated to be a potent and selective inhibitor for membrane-bound NADPH-dependent oxidase through a binding to the flavoprotein component of the oxidase [12, 28, 43] . This intracellular NADPH-dependent oxidase can directly catalyze substrate oxygen conversion to the superoxide anion, which can in turn generate other reactive oxygen intermediates. Secondly, DA-induced mitogenesis is prevented by the membrane-permeable antioxidant, NAC. Finally, application of very low concentrations of H2 O2  can enhance both DA-induced protein tyrosine phosphorylation and mitogenesis. These observations suggest that ROS may serve as a second messenger in the signaling of DA-stimulated mitogenesis, adding evidence in support of the recent notion that ROS act as intracellular messengers of cell proliferation [22] . Like other astrocyte mitogens, such as endothelin [7, 26] , micromolar level DA-induced mitogenesis requires tyrosine phosphorylation. Application of DA to C6-D2L cells rapidly increases protein tyrosine phosphorylation. Concentration-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation studies show a similar profile to that of DA-induced DNA synthesis. Both protein tyrosine phosphorylation and mitogenesis can be effectively blocked by preincubation of the cells with genistein, a potent protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor [1] . However, unlike for the mitogen endothelin, DA-stimulated mitogenesis is not linked to the tyrosine kinase–ERK pathway since DA at micromolar levels has no stimulatory effect on ERK activation. Furthermore, PD098095, the MEK1 inhibitor, has little, if any, effect on high concentration of DA-induced mitogenesis although it does have some inhibitory effects on basal DNA synthesis. DA-stimulated mitogenesis at micromolar levels is partially mediated by PTX-sensitive G proteins. This is supported by the following evidence. (1) Pretreatment of the cells with 100 ng/ml PTX only inhibits DA-stimulated mitogenesis by about 24–50%, depending on concentrations of DA (Fig. 1 b). (2) Application of PTX, even in a very high concentration (500 ng/ml), only partially blocks DA-induced tyrosine phosphorylation. (3) The ability of PTX to inhibit protein tyrosine phosphorylation is correlated with that to inhibit DA-induced mitogenesis (Fig. 1 b). These observations raise the possibility that PTX-resistant G proteins may participate in the signaling of high concentration of DA-induced mitogenesis, although further studies are required. Some literature reports suggest that receptors coupled to PTX-insensitive G proteins or the small G protein Ras can regulate cell proliferation. For example, thrombin, an astrocytic mitogen, has been shown to stimulate DNA synthesis in 1321N1 astrocytoma cells through coupling with G12 , a Gq subtype of GTP binding proteins [41] . Recently, D2 receptors were also reported to stimulate prolactin release via coupling of a PTX-insensitive G protein pathway [8] . Whether or not D2 receptors might be coupled to PTX-insensitive G proteins or Ras small G proteins in response to high concentrations of DA needs further study. Our data suggest that activation of p38 MAPK is required for upregulation of GFAP synthesis following high concentrations of DA stimulation. This is based on the following observations. (1) Micromolar level DA-stimulated GFAP production can be completely inhibited by pretreatment of the cells with SB203580, a highly selective inhibitor of p38 MAPK [13, 27] . Inhibition of a parallel MAPK pathway by PD098059 has no effect on DA-induced GFAP expression, suggesting that a relative specificity of p38 MAPK may play a role in GFAP generation. (2) DA activates p38 MAPK activity at concentrations similar to those of DA-induced GFAP expression. (3) Both activation of p38 MAPK and GFAP synthesis are not regulated by D2 receptors. To our knowledge, this is the first report regarding the regulation of GFAP by p38 MAPK. In C6 cells, an increase in intracellular cAMP, either by stimulation of β-adrenergic receptors [44] or by stimulation of adenylate cyclase by forskolin [44] , is capable of stimulating GFAP. The relationship of cAMP to p38 MAPK deserves further investigation. In our cell culture studies, at least two pathways have been demonstrated to activate C6-D2L glioma cells. One is the D2-receptor-required intracellular redox–protein tyrosine kinase pathway, which is involved in stimulation of cell mitogenesis. Another is the D2 receptor-independent p38 MAPK cascade, which is involved in stimulation of GFAP synthesis. Interestingly, in an in vivo rat model, reactive astrocytes in the brain respond differently to brain injury. Some astrocytes undergo proliferation as indicated only by [3 H  ]thymidine incorporation; some exhibit hypertrophy labeled only by GFAP; some are labeled by both GFAP and [3 H  ]thymidine [25, 48] . This observation suggests that these two separate pathways may operate in the in vivo situation. Taken together, the information from our in vitro cell culture studies may provide insight into the mechanisms of in vivo striatal astrocytic response and help to elucidate potential roles of astrocytes in neurodegeneration.   Acknowledgements We thank Dr. K.A. Neve for providing C6-D2L cells.   
