 Cisplatin is one of the most active chemotherapeutic agents available for the treatment of a variety of malignancies, especially testicular and ovarian carcinoma. However, the drug’s clinical utility is restricted by both toxicological and especially tumour resistance considerations. For example, while high response rates can be achieved in ovarian cancer, the long-term results are disappointing due to the development of drug resistance leading to recurrence and subsequent death of most of these patients [1] . Shortly after the introduction of cisplatin into widespread clinical use in the early-mid 1970s, a collaborative programme of analogue development was begun between the Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, and Johnson Matthey to address these limitations. Initially, the focus was aimed at the discovery of a less toxic but equally efficacious cisplatin analogue. As part of these analogue studies, important structure–activity rules to define the requirements for antitumour activity of platinum compounds were established [2] . More than 300 complexes were examined and approximately 40 identified as active at the preclinical level. From a shortlist of eight candidates, two, i.e., JM8 (diammine (1,1-cyclobutane dicarboxylato) platinum(II); carboplatin, CBDCA, Paraplatin® ) and JM9 (cis -dichloro-trans -dihydroxo-cis -bis(isopropylamine) platinum(IV), CHIP, iproplatin), entered clinical trial [3] . Structures are shown in Fig. 1  . Carboplatin was shown to be less toxic (myelosuppression being dose-limiting) than cisplatin (or iproplatin), equally active to cisplatin and more active than iproplatin (see [4]  for a review). Carboplatin is now registered worldwide, and has emerged as the first-line treatment of choice (along with paclitaxel) for patients with advanced ovarian cancer. The next phase of analogue development (also in collaboration with Bristol Myers, later Bristol Myers Squibb) concerned the search for platinum compounds possessing sufficient oral bioavailability as to be available to patients as tablets/capsules. To overcome the poor bioavailability of cisplatin and carboplatin, a new series of platinum(IV) complexes with lipophilic axial ligands, the platinum(IV) ammine/amine dicarboxylates, were developed. From around 50 dicarboxylates exhibiting oral antitumour activity against the murine ADJ/PC6 subcutaneous plasmacytoma tumour, ten, including JM221 (bis-butyrato amminedichloro(cyclohexylamine) platinum(IV)) and JM216 (bis-acetato amminedichloro(cyclohexylamine) platinum(IV), BMS 182751) (Fig. 1  for structures) were selected for further antitumour evaluation against human ovarian carcinoma xenografts [5] . Parallel in vitro studies had also shown that the platinum(IV) ammine/amine dicarboxylates, JM221 [6]  and JM216 [7] , retained activity against some acquired cisplatin-resistant human ovarian carcinoma cell lines and that longer chain dicarboxylates such as JM221 were considerably more potent than cisplatin. A consideration of oral absorption properties, antitumour activity and toxicological characteristics (especially emetogenic potential in the ferret) led to JM216 being selected for clinical trial. JM216 entered clinical trial at the Royal Marsden Hospital, Sutton, in 1992, initially given as a single oral dose every 3 weeks. Subsequent phase I trials established that a schedule daily for 5 days was optimal; myelosuppression (thrombocytopenia and leucopenia) was dose-limiting [8] . The drug is now undergoing various phase II/III trials. In the 1990s, the focus of the collaboration has been to discover platinum analogues capable of circumventing cisplatin resistance. The mechanisms underlying tumour resistance to cisplatin are known to be multifactorial and include decreased drug transport, increased cellular detoxification due to increased glutathione and metallothionein, changes in DNA repair involving increased nucleotide excision repair (NER) and/or loss of mismatch repair (MMR), increased tolerance of DNA adducts and alterations in the apoptotic cell death pathway [9] . The relative importance of these factors clinically is not known but strategies to overcome cisplatin resistance could improve the outcome of patients with ovarian carcinoma. One strategy to overcome cisplatin resistance is to design new platinum analogues that specifically address some, or ideally all, of the above known resistance mechanisms. To assist in the identification of analogues capable of circumventing cisplatin resistance, we established panels of human ovarian carcinoma cell lines, sensitive and resistant to cisplatin and analogues [10,11] . A key feature of this platinum drug discovery cascade was the inclusion of ‘mechanism-directed’ models of acquired cisplatin resistance [11] ; with a pair of lines (41M/41Mcis R) exhibiting resistance due to decreased drug transport, another pair (CH1/CH1cis R) with resistance mediated at the level of DNA repair and a third (A2780/A2780cis R) with multifactorial resistance mechanisms of decreased uptake, increased glutathione and increased DNA repair. For many of the cell lines, xenograft counterparts were established [12–14]  thereby allowing downstream in vivo antitumour evaluation of lead molecules (i.e., those circumventing cisplatin resistance in vitro). Further details of the cascade have been published previously [4] . From an in vitro evaluation of several hundred analogues, two compounds, JM335 (trans -ammine (cyclohexylaminedichlorodihydroxo) platinum(IV)) and ZD0473 (cis -amminedichloro(2-methylpyridine) platinum(II)), have been identified as lead molecules (Fig. 1  for structures). The latest findings with these drugs form the basis of the remainder of this review.  2 JM335: preclinical studies with an active trans  platinum complex JM335 represents one of three independent classes of ‘active’ trans  platinum complex discovered during the 1990s [15–17] . The trans -platinum complexes contravene the original structure–activity rules assigned to platinum complexes [2]  and represent rationally designed molecules aimed at inducing a different spectrum of adducts on DNA. Early studies with JM335 showed circumvention of acquired cisplatin resistance in vitro against at least some cell lines (e.g., 41Mcis R and CH1cis R) [15]  and a good measure of in vivo antitumour activity against both human ovarian carcinoma xenografts [15,18]  (but less than that observed for cisplatin) and against acquired cisplatin-resistant murine ADJ/PC6 plasmacytoma and L1210 leukaemia models [19] . Of interest was that the platinum(II) counterpart of JM335 (JM334) did not show in vivo antitumour activity [18] . JM335 has been shown to induce lesions on DNA distinct from those induced by cisplatin illustrated by the lack of recognition of JM335-induced adducts on DNA extracted from treated tumour cells by a monoclonal antibody raised against cisplatinated-DNA [20] . Other studies revealed that JM335 induced apoptosis in the CH1 cell line [21] . Recent studies have focused on gene-specific repair of DNA lesions formed by JM335 versus its cis  isomer JM149 and cisplatin in two human ovarian carcinoma cell lines; the intrinsically cisplatin-sensitive CH1 and the relatively resistant SKOV-3. Fig. 2   illustrates the ability of these two cell lines to remove DNA lesions induced by JM335, JM149 and cisplatin from a region of the N-ras gene, as assayed by quantitative-PCR. Results showed that the CH1 cell line was unable to remove adducts at 24 h post 5 h drug exposure formed by any of the three agents. In contrast, SKOV-3 removed adducts formed by the two cis -oriented compounds cisplatin and JM149 but not adducts formed by the trans  compound JM335. Other studies investigating the ability of these compounds to induce cell death showed that all three compounds induce apoptosis in both cell lines but the rate of death was markedly faster for the trans  isomer (e.g., following a 2 h exposure to 2×IC50  concentrations, the time for 50% of cells to undergo apoptotic detachment was around 24 h for JM335, but around 72 h for JM149). These data provide further evidence that the cellular pharmacological properties of the trans  compound JM335 differ from those of cisplatin and even its cis  isomer. The future challenge is to achieve adequate delivery of these intrinsically relatively reactive platinum drugs to tumours in vivo. To date, including JM335 [18] , the level of in vivo antitumour activity against human solid tumours has not matched their promising in vitro and cellular pharmacological properties.  3 ZD0473: studies with a sterically hindered platinum drug Many previous studies of platinum drug resistance, including our own using the panel of human ovarian carcinoma cell lines [22] , have indicated that drug inactivation by cytoplasmic thiol-containing species, principally glutathione (GSH) and metallothionein (MT), contributes to resistance [9] . The rational design of a platinum drug possessing a reduced susceptibility to binding to thiols would offer the potential to lessen the impact of this commonly described mechanism of resistance. This was achieved in ZD0473 (formerly known as JM473 and AMD473) by increasing the steric bulk at the platinum centre using the 2-methylpyridine carrier ligand. As predicted by chemical considerations, ZD0473 was shown to be relatively less reactive than cisplatin to the thiol-containing molecules, methionine and GSH [23,24] . The drug also possesses a two-fold slower aquation rate in water than that of cisplatin [23] . ZD0473 exhibited a promising level of in vitro potency against the 41Mcis R, CH1cis R and A2780cis R acquired cisplatin-resistant cell lines [24] . At the level of DNA binding, ZD0473 was shown to form some unique adducts when compared to cisplatin (e.g., novel sites on naked plasmid DNA) and displayed a much slower rate of formation of interstrand crosslinks [23,24] . ZD0473 also showed in vivo antitumour activity by both the intraperitoneal and oral routes, including against some models of acquired cisplatin resistance [25,26] . In rodents, ZD0473 possesses a toxicity profile similar to carboplatin with myelosuppression the dose-limiting toxicity [25] . AMD473 entered clinical trial at the Royal Marsden NHS Trust Hospital in November 1997 under the auspices of the UK Cancer Research Campaign. In April 1998, the drug was licenced from AnorMED to Zeneca as ZD0473. Using an intravenous dosing schedule given initially every 3 weeks, and pharmacokinetically guided dose escalation from 12 mg/m2 , a dose-limiting toxicity of myelosuppression (thrombocytopenia and neutropenia) was observed at the 130 mg/m2  dose-level. In addition, some patients at this dose-level were unable to receive repeated dosing every 3 weeks. Subsequent investigations of lower doses, 110–120 mg/m2  at which serious toxicity was not observed, suggested that non-heavily pre-treated patients might tolerate higher doses and patients are currently being treated at 150 mg/m2 . There has been no nephro-, oto- or neuro-toxicity noted to date. The pharmacokinetics of total and free platinum were linear over the range of doses used with free platinum decaying in a tri-phasic pattern with a long (approx. 72 h) terminal t 1/2γ  . There has been evidence of antitumour activity in a patient with ovarian cancer. Additional laboratory-based studies with ZD0473 have focused on drug metabolism, the elucidation of mechanisms of resistance to ZD0473 in ovarian cancer cell lines and effects on growth inhibition of manipulating intracellular GSH and metallothionein levels in tumour cells. Compared to previous metabolism studies performed with the platinum(IV) dicarboxylate oral drug, JM216, the metabolism of ZD0473 is relatively simple with the major products being the aquated cis  and trans  species. The drug is relatively stable and even with incubation of ZD0473 with excess glutathione (with and without glutathione-S -transferase) this did not result in the formation of any glutathione adducts. Similar to resistance studies performed with cisplatin, acquired ZD0473-resistant cell lines have been established using the CH1 and A2780 ovarian lines. Both the CH1 (3.3-fold-resistant) and A2780 (2.7-fold-resistant) ZD0473R lines showed cross-resistance to cisplatin and carboplatin. Both resistant lines showed a small reduction in platinum transport following exposure to ZD0473, reflected in similar decreases in DNA platination. Interestingly, when compared to their parent lines, both resistant lines showed an elevation in GSH levels (1.5-fold in A2780ZD0473R and 2.7-fold in CH1ZD0473R). Hence, at least some mechanisms of resistance to ZD0473 are shared with those previously described in many lines for cisplatin. The A2780ZD0473R line also appears to possess changes in proteins associated with DNA mismatch repair [27]  and apoptosis [28]  in that loss of hMLH1 and a marked increase in the antiapoptotic protein BCL2 in comparison to A2780 were observed. In contrast, in a series of acquired cisplatin-resistant ovarian cell-line pairs, there was no consistent pattern of BCL2 expression with, in some cases, levels being lower in resistant versus parent lines (e.g., 41Mcis R/41M), whereas levels were higher in CH1cis R versus CH1. Intriguing effects on growth inhibition induced by ZD0473 versus cisplatin have been obtained by manipulation of intracellular thiol levels in human ovarian cancer cells. Fig. 3   shows the effect in terms of fold-change in growth inhibition (IC50 ) of (a) increasing GSH levels in A2780 cells using pre-exposure to GSH-ester, (b) increasing MT levels using an A2780 subline stably transfected with MTIIA cDNA and (c) reducing GSH levels by approximately 80% using pre-exposure of SKOV-3 cells (which have relatively high intrinsic levels) to buthionine sulfoxamine (BSO). As predicted by the reduced susceptibility of ZD0473 to bind to thiols when compared to cisplatin, increasing either GSH or MT levels reduced the growth inhibitory properties of cisplatin to a greater extent than for ZD0473 (e.g., with increasing MT levels; 7-fold loss in potency of cisplatin but only 1.3-fold loss with ZD0473). In contrast, and surprisingly, the reduction of GSH levels using BSO in SKOV-3 cells resulted in a greater potentiation with ZD0473 (2.5-fold) than with cisplatin (1.5-fold). Although BSO may exert additional effects on cells such as affecting drug transport, metabolism or DNA repair [29]  these data indicate that further studies are required to fully elucidate the interactions between ZD0473 and sulphur-containing molecules in tumour cells.  4 Conclusions Over a period of almost 20 years, the Institute of Cancer Research/Johnson Matthey/AnorMED collaboration has resulted in three platinum complexes entering clinical trial: carboplatin is registered worldwide, the oral platinum JM216 is undergoing phase II/III trials and ZD0473 is currently in phase I studies. The trans  platinum complex JM335 represents one of a small series of trans  complexes which exhibits promising in vitro antitumour properties, especially against acquired cisplatin-resistant cells.   Acknowledgements Laboratory studies at the CRC Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, formerly the Drug Development Section, of the Institute of Cancer Research were supported predominantly by grants from the UK Cancer Research Campaign. All studies were conducted in collaboration with chemists at Johnson Matthey, and in recent years, AnorMED. Thanks are due to numerous post-doctoral scientists, scientific officers, Ph.D. students, clinical fellows and research nurses who have contributed over the 20-plus years. Special recognition is reserved for Professor Ken Harrap, without whose leadership little of this research would have occurred.   
