 Since arachidonic acid (20:4n-6, AA) and docosahexaenoic acid (22:6n-3, DHA) compose the major portion of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) in brain lipids, these PUFAs are suggested to play an important role in the regulation of functions of the central nervous system (CNS). Most importantly, DHA has been demonstrated to be essential in maintaining normal functions of CNS, which has been demonstrated by the impairment of memory functions occurring in experimental rodents with n-3 PUFA deficiency [1,2] . However, the biochemical basis of the essentiality of DHA in the functions of CNS has not been defined. On the other hand, AA itself or AA-derived eicosanoids modulates neurotransmission [3,4] . Therefore, the functions of CNS may be modified by dietary supplementation with n-3 PUFA, which antagonizes the metabolism and actions of AA [5] . Δ9 -Tetrahydrocannabinol, a psychoactive compound derived from marijuana, acts through either the CB1 or CB2 receptor; the former is highly expressed in areas of CNS [6]  and the latter is localized mainly in peripheral immune cells [7] . On the other hand, the discovery of endogenous ligands of cannabinoid receptors in the brain has facilitated the progress of research on the regulation of cannabinoid-receptor-mediated neuronal functions. Recently, two arachidonic acid (20:4n-6, AA)-containing compounds, anandamide, (N -arachidonoylethanolamine) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), have been identified as the endogenous ligands for cannabinoid receptors and these molecules have been detected in various brain regions [8] . Furthermore, Sugiura and colleague demonstrated that 2-AG is the major monoacylglycerol (MG) molecular species in the rat brain and its potencies for CB1 and CB2 receptors are much greater than those of anandamide [9–11] . Furthermore, it has been reported that MG molecular species containing fatty acids other than AA are less potent for both CB1 and CB2 receptors [10,11] . Therefore, it can be assumed that 2-AG plays a dominant role in the regulation of cannabinoid receptor functions in the brain. It has been suggested that the sequential hydrolysis of arachidonate-containing phospholipids is one of the major biosynthetic pathways of 2-AG in the brain [12,13]  although the candidate of precursor phospholipid classes as well as the enzymes involved in 2-AG biosynthesis have not been identified. On the other hand, MG species containing EPA and DHA were demonstrated to be less potent for cannabinoid receptors than 2-AG [10,11] . Therefore, the manipulation of dietary n-3 PUFA status may change the levels of 2-AG as well as n-3 PUFA-containing MG in tissues, which indicates the alteration of endogenous ligand activity for cannabinoid receptors. To test this hypothesis, we determined the effects of chronic n-3 PUFA deficiency and short-term supplementation with a DHA-rich diet on brain 2-AG levels. In addition, we analyzed the fatty acid composition of brain phospholipids in mice under different dietary n-3 PUFA status in order to differentiate the levels of 2-AG in their brains.  2 Materials and methods 2.1 Preparation of monoacylglycerol standards Triarachidonoylglycerol, trieicosapentaenoylglycerol or tridocosahexaenoylglycerol (Nu-Chek-Prep Inc., Elysian, MN) was treated with lipase from Rhizopus arrhizus  (Type XI, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) as described by Schmid et al. [14] . The 2-acyl form of MG was the primary product in the treatment of triacylglycerol with the lipase, although a small amount of the 1(3)-acyl form of MG was generated due to spontaneous migration of the acyl moiety from the Sn -2 position to the Sn -1(3) position. The 1(3)- and 2-acyl forms of MG generated during the lipase treatment of triacylglycerols were extracted from the reaction mixture with diethylether and separated from each other by silica gel thin-layer chromatography (TLC) using a mixture of CHCl3 /ethylacetate/trimethoxyborane (100:20:7, v/v/v) [15]  as a developing solvent. Each MG was recovered from the adsorbents by the method of Bligh and Dyer [16] . The 1(3)- and 2-acyl forms of monopalmitoylglycerol and monooleoylglycerol were purchased from Nu-Chek-Prep and Sigma, respectively, which were purified by the above-mentioned silica gel TLC before use. 1-Heptadecanoylglycerol (Nu-Chek-Prep Inc.) was used as an internal standard for quantification. The purity and quantity of all the MG standards used were determined by gas–liquid chromatography as fatty acid methylesters prepared by transmethylation using methanolic HCl (5%, w/v) in the presence of hepadecanoic acid (17:0).  2.2 Preparation of MG dibenzoates The dried MG sample was treated with 25 μl of benzoylchloride (Nakalai Tesque, Tokyo) in the presence of 200 μl of anhydrous pyridine (Wako Pure Chem. Osaka, Japan) for 15 min at 60°C. After the addition of 1 ml of distilled water, the mixture was heated for another 15 min and then 1 ml of 30% (w/v) aqueous ammonium hydroxide was added. MG dibenzoates were extracted three times with 2 ml of n -hexane and purified by silica gel TLC using a solvent system of benzene/petroleum ether/diethyl ether (50:45:5, v/v/v) [17] . A spot corresponding to MG dibenzoates (R f  =0.26) [17]  was visualized under an ultraviolet light after spraying with purimurine (Nakalai Tesque) dissolved in acetone/water (4:1). MG dibenzoate was recovered from the adsorbent by the method of Bligh and Dyer [16]  and reconstituted in 100 μl of acetonitrile for subsequent HPLC analysis.  2.3 HPLC separation and quantification of MG dibenzoates MG dibenzoates with different acyl chains were separated and quantified by reverse-phase HPLC with an octadecylsilica column (4.6×150 mm, Senshu Pak, Senshu Scientific Co., Ltd., Tokyo) equilibrated with 85% aqueous acetonitrile at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. MG dibenzoates were detected by ultraviolet absorbance at 230 nm (SPD-6A, Shimadzu, Tokyo). The standard MG dibenzoates were used to confirm the retention time of those prepared from mouse brain by the HPLC. Quantification of MG dibenzoates was carried out by comparing their peak area with that of 1-heptadecanoylglycerol (17:0MG) dibenzoate added as an internal standard. The peaks observed in the HPLC analysis of mouse brain MG were further identified by on-line atmospheric-pressure chemical ionization-mass spectrometry (APCI-MS) (HP1100MSD, Yokagawa Analytical Systems, Tokyo) operating in the positive-ionization mode at 90 V.  2.4 Animals and dietary protocols The experimental protocol was approved by the Committee of Animal Care and Use of Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical University (Protocol No. 2001-31).Experiment 1 Female ddy mice at 4 weeks of age (SLC) were fed a diet supplemented with either 5% (w/w) safflower oil (n-3-deficient diet) or safflower oil plus DHA ethylester (99:1) (n-3-sufficient diet) for 23 weeks before mating with male ddy mice. Male pups weaned at 4 weeks old were fed the same diet as their dams for an additional 6 weeks prior to analysis. The fatty acid composition of the dietary fat is shown in Table 1  .   Experiment 2 Male ddy mice at 4 weeks old (SLC, Shizuoka, Japan) were divided into two groups. Each group of mice was assigned to an AIN-76 powdered diet (Nihon Nosan Kogyo, Tsukuba, Japan) supplemented with either 10% (w/w) linoleate (18:2n-6, LA)-rich safflower oil (Nippon Oil Industry, Tokyo) (low-DHA diet) or 10% DHA-rich fish oil (Nissui, Tsukuba, Japan) (high-DHA diet) for 4 weeks prior to analysis. The fatty acid composition of the dietary fat is shown in Table 1 .    2.5 Lipid extraction from mice brain Mice lightly anesthetized with diethylether were decapitated and their heads were immediately immersed into liquid nitrogen and left for more than 10 min. Frozen whole brains were dissected from the skull and homogenized using a blender in chloroform/methanol (1:2, v/v) in the presence of 1-heptadecanoylglycerol (1.45 nmol) as an internal standard, and total lipids were obtained according to the method of Bligh and Dyer [16] . Total lipids were applied to a silica gel cartridge column (Sep-Pak Plus Si, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) that had been pre-equilibrated with chloroform. Chloroform (10 ml) was loaded onto the column to remove almost all triacylglycerols, cholesterol and diacylglycerols. A MG-rich fraction was eluted from the column with 10 ml of chloroform/methanol (98:2, v/v), and dried using nitrogen gas. The fraction containing total phospholipids was then eluted from the column with 20 ml of chloroform/methanol/distilled water (1:2:0.8, v/v/v), and the eluate was processed to obtain total phospholipids according to the method of Bligh and Dyer [16] .  2.6 Analysis of fatty acid composition of phospholipids in mouse brain Phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), phosphatidylserine (PS) and phosphatidylinositol (PI) were purified from the total phospholipids by two-dimensional silica gel TLC using chloroform/methanol/formic acid/distilled water (60:30:8:2, v/v/v/v) and chloroform/methanol/25% ammonium hydroxide solution (60:40:6, v/v/v) for the first and second developments, respectively. Fatty acids in each phospholipid class were converted into their corresponding methylesters by boiling in methanol containing 5% (w/v) hydrogen chloride, and analyzed by gas–liquid chromatography with a capillary column (DB-225, J&B Scientific, Folsom, CA, USA).  2.7 Statistical analysis Statistical analysis was performed using Student's t -test to confirm significance between the dietary groups.   3 Results 3.1 Separation of authentic MG dibenzoates by HPLC Fig. 1   presents a reverse-phase HPLC profile of the dibenzoates of authentic MG. Almost all 1(3)- and 2-acyl isomers of MG dibenzoates with different acyl groups were clearly separated, except that the derivatives of 2-palmitoylglycerol (2-16:0MG) and 1-octadecenylglycerol (1-18:1MG) coeluted. When 1 nmol each of MG standards was derivatized and separated by HPLC (Fig. 1 ), the peak areas obtained were almost same among all the derivatives (data not shown). Therefore, we calculated the amounts of MG from brain extracts using the following equation: (peak area of dibenzoate of MG interest)/(peak area of dibenzoate of 1-17:0MG)×1.45 nmol.  3.2 Identification of 2-AG and other MGs in mouse brain Dibenzoate derivatives of mouse brain MG were separated by reverse-phase HPLC; a typical HPLC profile is shown in Fig. 2A  . The retention time of peaks I and II were identical with those of dibenzoates of 1(3)-AG and 2-AG, respectively. The APCI-mass spectrum of peak II included several signals at m /z  604.4 and m /z  609.4 (Fig. 2B , panel a); these signals corresponded to mass numbers 18 or 23 greater than the predicted molecular weight of the dibenzoate of monoarachidonoylglycerol (=586.4), respectively. Therefore, these ion signals can be assumed as [M+NH4]+  and [M+Na]+ , respectively. The occurrence of [M+NH4]+  can be accounted for by MG dibenzoates having been were washed with ammonium hydroxide solution before their TLC purification as described in Materials and methods. In this APCI mass spectrum, another ion peak at m /z  465.3 was also obtained in both mass spectra, which indicates the formation of [M–C6 H5 COO]+ . The APCI-mass spectrum of peak I whose retention time corresponded to that of 1(3)-AG-dibenzoate was quite similar to that of peak II (Fig. 2B , panel a). On the other hand, the earlier peaks III and IV were detected and identified by APCI-MS as dibenzoates of 1(3)- and 2-monodocosahexaenoylglycerol (DHG-MG) based in the demonstration of [M+NH4 ]+ =628.4, [M+Na]+ =633.4 and [M–C6 H5 COO]+ =489.3 (Fig. 2B , panels c and d). Similarly, several other peaks were identified as dibenzoates of monopalmitoylglycerol, monooleoylglycerol and monostearoylglycerol, although 2-palmitoylglycerol and 1(3)-oleoylglycerol derivatives were found to coelute as shown in Fig. 1  (data not shown). Thus, the major MG molecular species in mouse brain extracts could be separated by HPLC as their dibenzoate derivatives and identified by subsequent APCI-MS.  3.3 Effects of chronic deficiency of n-3 PUFA on the levels of AA and DHA in phospholipids and MG levels in brain In the n-3-deficient group, the DHA levels in brain PC, PE and PS were markedly lower than those in the n-3-sufficient group (Table 2  ). As reported in other studies [1,2] , the decrease in the DHA level in brain phospholipids is compensated by the increase in 22:5n-6 and 22:4n-6 levels in the n-3 deficient group (data not shown). The DHA level in brain PI was very low but was significantly lower in the n-3-deficient group than in the n-3-sufficient group. However, the AA levels in all the four phospholipid classes were similar between the two dietary groups. As shown above, the dietary n-3 PUFA deficiency induced a marked reduction of the DHA level without changing the AA level in brain phospholipids in mice. However, the brain 2-AG level in the n-3-deficient group was significantly higher than that in the n-3-sufficient group (Fig. 3  ). In the n-3-deficient group, the brain 2-DHG MG level was significantly lower than that in the n-3-sufficient group. In addition, the levels of 2-16:0MG plus 1(3)-18:1MG as well as 2-18:1MG were higher in the n-3-deficient group than in the n-3-sufficient group. 1-16:0MG levels were similar between the two dietary groups.  3.4 Effects of short-term supplementation with DHA rich diet on AA and DHA levels in phospholipids and on MG levels in brain As demonstrated above, the reduction of DHA levels in brain phospholipids associated with dietary n-3 PUFA deficiency led to the increase in the brain 2-AG level. We, therefore, confirm whether or not the enrichment with DHA in brain phospholipids could alter brain 2-AG levels in mice. A relatively short-term of dietary enrichment with DHA-induced significant changes in the levels of DHA as well as AA in brain phospholipids (Table 3  ). The DHA levels in brain PC and PE of the brain were significantly higher in the high-DHA group than in the low-DHA group (Table 3 ). The DHA level in brain PI was slightly but significantly higher in the high-DHA diet group than in the low-DHA diet group. By contrast, the AA levels in brain PC and PE were significantly lower in the high-DHA diet group than in the low-DHA group, although those in PI and PS were not significantly different between the two dietary groups. The brain 2-AG level was significantly lower in the high-DHA diet group than in the low-DHA diet group (Fig. 4  ). Although 1(3)-AG was a minor constituent of brain MG relative to 2-AG, its level was also lower in the high-DHA diet group than in the low-DHA diet group. There was no significant difference in the levels of the two DHA-containing MG isomers. In addition, the levels of 1-16:0MG and 2-18:1MG were similar between the two dietary groups, although the level of 2-16:0MG plus 1(3)-18:1MG was lower in the high-DHA diet group than in the low-DHA diet group.   4 Discussion It has been suggested that 2-AG is generated from arachidonate-containing phospholipids through their sequential hydrolysis by PLC and DG lipase [12] . Since the Sn -2 position of the PI of mammalian tissues is esterified mainly with AA and the existence of families of PLC isozymes specific for PI have been demonstrated in the brain [18] , it can be hypothesized that PI is the most likely phospholipid class utilized for 2-AG biosynthesis. However, Bisogno et al. [13]  demonstrated in mouse neuroblastoma that AA-containing phospholipids are hydrolyzed by phospholipase D to phosphatidic acid, followed by phosphatidate-hydrolyzing phosphatase and then DG lipase to form 2-AG. More recently, Lee et al. [19]  demonstrated that the enzymatic activity for esterifying glycerol with a fatty acid in the brain is also a possible pathway of 2-AG biosynthesis. We demonstrated that the dietary supplementation with a high-DHA diet reduced the 2-AG level in the absence of the reduction of the AA level in PI as compared with the low-DHA diet group (Fig. 4  and Table 3 ). The reduction of the AA level in PC and PE as well as PS by a high-DHA diet as compared with the low-DHA diet group can be due to the difference in brain 2-AG levels between the two dietary groups. Therefore, the pathway that involves the utilization of phosphatidic acid [13] , presumably derived from PC or PE, more likely accounts for our observations. However, the changes in AA level in phospholipids alone could not account for the alteration of the brain 2-AG levels, because we found the elevation of the 2-AG level in the mouse brain with reduced DHA level without affecting the AA level in all the four phospholipid classes. These results enable us to consider that DHA has an inhibitory properties for 2-AG biosynthesis in the brain. For example, DHA-containing phospholipids may inhibit the enzymatic step(s) for the hydrolysis of AA-containing phospholipids, presumably PLC or PLD. This mechanism, if any, may also account for the reduction of the 2-AG level in brain phospholipids of mice fed with the high-DHA diet. However, the biochemical role of DHA-containing phospholipids in regard to the interaction with 2-AG biosynthesis should be further investigated. Unlike 2-AG, DHA-containing MGs have very low levels despite the abundance of DHA-containing phospholipids in the brain (Tables 2 and 3 ). In addition, the 2-22:6n-3MG level did not increase even when the DHA level in brain phospholipids was elevated by dietary enrichment with DHA (Fig. 4  and Table 3 ). These results indicate that the enzymatic system(s) preferentially generate 2-AG over 2-22:6n-3MG. If AA-containing phospholipids are indeed the precursors of 2-AG, DHA-containing phospholipids would not be efficiently utilized for 2-22:6n-3MG synthesis. The hydrolysis of DHA-containing phospholipids by enzymes such as PLC or PLD should be examined to clarify the mechanism of preferential generation of 2-AG over 2-22:6n-3MG. There are reports showing that the administration of a CB1 antagonist, SR14716, enhances memory functions in mice and rats [20,21] . In addition, CB1 receptor knockout mice retain memory longer than wild-type controls [22,23] . These observations suggest that endogenous cannabinoid ligands exhibit a memory-disrupting property. Furthermore, CB1 knockout mice show increased aggressive and anxiogenic-like responses as well as a higher sensitivity to a chronic unpredictable mild stress as shown by their enhanced depressive-like responses [24] . The pharmacological and genetic manipulations of endogenous cannabinoid action obviously clarified its role in the functions of CNS. Accordingly, the elevation of the 2-AG level in the brain of mice under chronic n-3 PUFA deficiency is an important finding which could elucidate the molecular mechanism of their abnormalities in memory functions [1,2] . On the other hand, the reduction of 2-AG levels in the brain of mice fed with the n-3 PUFA-rich diet suggests a possibility that this dietary manipulation may improve memory and emotional functions. Lim and Suzuki [25]  reported that dietary supplementation with a high-DHA diet enhances the learning ability of mice tested using a maze task as compared with low-DHA diet. Recently, Berger et al. have demonstrated that a short-term supplementation of both AA and DHA in liquid formula increases the levels of anandamide (N -arachidonoylethanolamine) and its DHA-containing analogue (N -docosahexaenoylethanolamine) in newborn piglet brain [26] . However, under the same conditions, the levels of MG containing AA or DHA did not increase. They demonstrated the elevation of the AA- and DHA-containing N -acylethanolamime level even after the supplementation with only a small amount (below 1% of total fatty acids of the formula) of these PUFA in the formula for newborn piglets for a relatively short period (18 days). Therefore, AA and DHA would be incorporated into these pathways of N -acylethanolamide biosynthesis more rapidly than into the 2-AG synthetic pathways. There are two proposed biosynthetic pathways for anandamide, which involves the formation of a unique precursor, N -acylphosphatidylethanolamine [27]  or direct N -acylation of ethanolamine [28] . Bisogno et al. [29]  have already shown the formation of N -docosahexaenoylphosphatidylethanolamine as a possible precursor for the biosynthesis of N -docosahexaenoylethanolamide in bovine retinal tissues. Although the precise mechanism by which dietary supplementation with AA and DHA preferentially leads to the incorporation of these PUFAs into N -acylethanolamines is still unknown, these results also suggest that the manipulation of dietary PUFA can modify the psychoemotional status through the change in the levels of endogenous cannabinoid ligands. In the present study, we demonstrated that the dietary n-3 PUFA status is one of the important factors that influence brain 2-AG levels. On the other hand, various physiological and pathological conditions leading to the alteration of endogenous 2-AG levels and its implication to these events have been reported [30–33] . Therefore, our findings may help clarify the mechanism by which the manipulation of the dietary n-3 PUFA status modulates the CNS function under physiological and pathological conditions.   Acknowledgements We thank Dr. Kengo Akimoto (Institute for Health Care Science, Research, Suntory Ltd.) for conducting APCI-MS analysis and helpful discussion on the molecular identification of MG.   
