BACKGROUND: Tea is one of the most frequently consumed beverages in the world. Antioxidant polyphenol compounds (such as catechins and flavonols) are abundantly present in both green and black teas and have been observed to have anticarcinogenic properties in cell and animal model studies. In black tea, however, most of the catechins have been oxidized to forms that may have reduced anticarcinogenic properties. Despite indications from experimental studies that tea may protect against cancer, epidemiologic evidence has been inconclusive. PURPOSE: The association between black tea consumption and the subsequent risk of stomach, colorectal, lung, and breast cancers was investigated in The Netherlands Cohort Study on Diet and Cancer among 58,279 men and 62,573 women aged 55-69 years. METHODS: Subjects in the cohort completed a self-administered questionnaire on dietary habits and other risk factors for cancer at base line in 1986. Follow-up for cancer was done by means of computerized record linkage with all nine regional cancer registries in The Netherlands and the national pathology database. During 4.3 years of follow-up, 200, 650, 764, and 650 cases of stomach, colorectal, lung, and breast cancers were diagnosed, respectively. The questionnaire data of case subjects and those of a random subcohort (n = 3500) were used to calculate rate ratios (RRs) of cancer in categories of consumers of black tea compared with nonconsumers. RESULTS: Tea was not used by 13% of the subjects in the cohort, whereas 37%, 34%, and 16% consumed one to two, three to four, and five or more cups of tea per day, respectively. No association was observed between tea consumption and risk of colorectal cancer: The risk among tea drinkers in each consumption category was similar to that among nondrinkers. The RR of breast cancer among consumers of five or more cups of tea per day was 1.3 (95% confidence interval = 0.9-2.0); no dose-response association was observed. In age- and sex-adjusted analyses, consumption of tea was inversely associated with stomach (two-sided P for trend = .147) and lung (two-sided P for trend < .001) cancers. However, tea drinkers appeared to smoke less and to eat more vegetables and fruits than nondrinkers. When smoking and dietary factors were taken into account, tea in itself did not appear to protect against stomach and lung cancers: The RRs in all consumption categories were close to unity. Analysis of the tea and cancer relationship in a subgroup that included subjects in the lowest two quintiles of consumption of vegetables and fruits also failed to reveal a protective effect of tea consumption on the risk of three cancer types studied (colorectal, lung, and breast cancers). CONCLUSIONS: This investigation does not support the hypothesis that consumption of black tea protects against four of the major cancers in humans; a cancer-enhancing effect was not evident, either.